These savory Italian-style vegetable flecked pancakes are a griddle revolution! Serve with heated pizza sauce and cheese, if desired.
Turn puff pastry into waffles that are crispy on the outside and tender on the inside for a sweet breakfast treat ready in minutes.
This is an easy mix-it-up-in-one-bowl-and-cook recipe. I make it for every brunch I attend. You may substitute chopped spinach for the broccoli if you wish.
Impress your guests with this savory Dutch baby recipe made with thyme, chives, sausage, and white Cheddar cheese at your next brunch.
This is so good and reminds me of a real moist kind of a sweet quick bread.  Everybody asks for the recipe: this bread is moist, and easy to make too.  Note: If you are using frozen blueberries, you can thaw them in the microwave for about 3 minutes.  However, you need to increase the amount of blueberries to 3/4 cup.
It's easy to make your own delicious granola! Mix together your favorite grains, seeds and nuts, then bake.
This is a scrumptious casserole of bread, cream cheese, eggs, and milk. Tastes just like regular French toast but it's made the night before and baked in the oven. This is not really sweet so you might like more maple syrup with it.
Pita bread rounds are topped with scrambled eggs, crispy bacon, and fresh vegetables in these hearty breakfast pizzas.
Tall, fluffy pancakes make the best breakfast, especially when there's plenty of butter and syrup. Make it extra special with berries and whipped cream!
Make delicious, fluffy pancakes from scratch. This recipe uses 7 ingredients you probably already have.
The classic moist pumpkin bread from Down East is spiced with cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg and cloves. This bread improves with age, so plan to make it a day ahead if possible.
A moist and delicious zucchini bread flavored with walnuts and cinnamon. Easy to bake and freeze, this recipe makes two loaves.
Sour cream gives a tangy twist to this otherwise traditional banana bread recipe.
Made-from-scratch waffles are ready in less than 30 minutes with this basic waffle recipe.
This French toast recipe is different because it uses flour.  I have given it to some friends and they've all liked it better than the French toast they usually make!
Fresh buttermilk is the secret ingredient for light and fluffy cakes in this buttermilk pancake recipe.
See how easy it is to make crepes. You'll need just 6 common ingredients for these French-style pancakes.
A classic waffle recipe includes basic ingredients you probably already have on hand, creating a perfectly crisp breakfast item.
A quick and easy crustless spinach quiche recipe that uses eggs, spinach, onion, and Muenster cheese for the perfect quiche in less than an hour.
Ginger, cinnamon and allspice give this pumpkin pancake recipe just a hint of sweetness, making it the perfect fall breakfast.
This family-friendly breakfast casserole is made with hash brown potatoes and ham in a creamy sauce for a yummy lazy day breakfast.
This savory deep-dish pie features herbed feta cheese that melts and mingles in every bite. The cheese is sauteed and mixed with spinach, mushrooms, Cheddar cheese and lots of garlic. This mixture is then combined with milk and eggs, and poured into a prepared crust. A bit more Cheddar cheese is sprinkled over the top, and then the quiche is slipped into the oven until it 's set.
Crowd pleasing banana pancakes made from scratch. A fun twist on ordinary pancakes.
Refrigerated biscuits with cinnamon bake in a tube pan. My 7 year old daughter, Leah, loves her Monkey Bread. Enjoy!
You might as well bake pumpkin bread in the large batch called for here, because everyone  loves it. Three full-sized loaves, lively with cinnamon, cloves and nutmeg, are your reward. Wrap loaves in cellophane, tie with a colorful ribbon, and give as a gift!
This is a very unique breakfast dish. Good for any holiday breakfast or brunch, it's filled with the fresh taste of blueberries, and covered with a rich blueberry sauce to make it a one of a kind.
Sausage, eggs, bread, and cheese snuggle down in a casserole, chill overnight, and bake in the morning. It's a hearty dish worth waking up for.
All you need is sliced bread, eggs, milk, and a few spices to make the best French toast for a quick and easy breakfast.
A sweet and sumptuous baked French toast recipe which is prepared the night before and baked in the morning.
This French toast casserole recipe is an easy breakfast treat that everyone will love.
Two small loaves of simple banana bread are easily had with this quick recipe.
When you don't have time to make a pastry crust, try this quick crustless version. You may add any other goodies you like, such as ham, chicken, crab, shrimp or broccoli.
These quick and easy pancakes are perfect for sleepy mornings.
Try this tried-and-true recipe for plain Irish soda bread with buttermilk that is a snap to prepare.  Make it early in the day, as it tastes best after sitting for a few hours.
Simple but delicious blueberry pancakes. Fresh or frozen blueberries are equally good.
A basic pancake recipe with flour, milk and egg.
This recipe is excellent served for breakfast with fruit, or at lunch or dinner with a salad. This recipe makes two 9 inch pies. The reason for this is because if you only make one you will hate yourself the next day when there are no leftovers. Bacon, ham, and spinach and mushrooms are layered with 3 cheeses in this rich delicious egg dish.
This homemade granola recipe uses oats, nuts, and dried fruit to create a tasty family-friendly breakfast cereal.
 Sour cream makes this bread especially moist and a bit tangy, a fine counterpoint to the intense sweetness of banana.
Simply delicious! Fresh shredded potatoes and onions make the difference in this breakfast casserole.
This is a fast and filling vegan smoothie with a deep pink color and a rich, creamy texture.
You'll get two loaves of classic zucchini bread, sweet and cinnamon-spicy.  This is a definite crowd-pleaser.
This is wonderful hot or cold, for breakfast or as a dessert. A definite family favorite!
This recipe makes a very moist loaf, owing to the addition of a little milk and a lot of banana.
Golden, tender and savory baked sausage balls.
These traditional crepes are made with eggs, milk, flour, salt and oil.
A ribbon of pecan streusel runs through this rich cream cheese-banana bread.
Light, mildly spiced and crowned with butter and cinnamon sugar, this quick bread is bound to be a big hit.
This easy banana bread recipe is quick to prepare, and everyone always comes back for seconds!
Strawberries blended with milk, yogurt, sugar, vanilla and ice.
A yummy breakfast treat, and very easy to make!! Serve with bacon or sausage, and some fried eggs, wonderful!!! Batter will keep in fridge for a couple of days if you can't make all at once, or you can freeze and make at a later date.
Essential crepe recipe.  Sprinkle warm crepes with sugar and lemon, or serve with cream or ice cream and fruit.
These light and fluffy pancakes go great with berry syrups.
A rich, puffy outer crust makes this baked French toast recipe well worth the time to prepare it! Use country-style bread, challah, or baguette slices.
I make this for my kids quite often.  It is very simple.  Preparing the batter in the food processor makes it that much easier. Serve with syrup and butter.  Also good with applesauce!
This is a simple banana nut muffin recipe with a yummy little twist: a wee sprinkling of coconut in the batter.
Anybody can add water to a boxed pancake mix, but you're better than that! These pancakes are not too thick, not too thin, but tender, light, buttery, and delicious.
A simple but delicious egg casserole flavored with cheese and oregano.
This filling waffles made with whole wheat flour, flax seed meal, and wheat germ are quite delicious. Serve with homemade blueberry syrup.
Tender shrimp and andouille sausage with red, green, and yellow bell peppers are served over cheese-flavored grits in this traditional low-country favorite.
Crepes are made with extra vanilla for a heavenly aroma.
Found this recipe in Pennsylvania Amish country.  Everyone who tries it, loves it!
Very ripe bananas keep this quick bread sweet and moist.
This secret family recipe for granddad's pancakes was passed down through the family and will become a family favorite in your house too.
Pan-fried potato pancakes are fun to make and fun to eat!
This is the way to get crisp bacon without having to constantly turn it, watch over it, or get burnt by splatters of grease. It 'fries' up flat and doesn't curl, which looks great beside a breakfast plate of eggs, and makes BLT sandwiches much easier. Very nice when feeding a family or crowd.
This batter makes light, fluffy, and delicious pancakes.  I have been making them for years and everyone that tries them wants the recipe.
Raisin bread the way it is meant to be -rolled around the sweetened cinnamon butter so that the spice ribbons throughout the loaf. This generous recipe will give you three lovely loaves.
These savory barbequed beef treats aren't pretty, but they are delicious. You can freeze them for a quick dinner, but hide them or your family will eat them up!
The blueberries in these whole wheat pancakes are so sweet and moist that they don't even need butter when eaten while hot!  This is our Saturday breakfast, healthy for me; yummy for husband and kids.
Very tasty and fluffy quiche made with spinach and cheddar. Easy to prepare.
Bananas, milk, peanut butter, honey, and ice are all you need to make this filling yet refreshing smoothie.
Hot jumbo buttermilk biscuits with creamy sausage gravy are ready in just 15 minutes for a hearty, family-favorite breakfast.
Mini rolls stuffed with deli ham and melted Swiss cheese are baked with a savory poppyseed-mustard sauce for an easy, tasty little bite or appetizer.
You get two loaves of dense and nutty bread.  This recipe also calls for vanilla for heightened flavor.
This is a very moist, honey-sweetened loaf with only nuts and a splash of vanilla to heighten the rich fruitiness.
I love to eat these! They are warm and light, yet very filling. Great on cold mornings.  This recipe is from my great grandmother. Serve with warm maple syrup and wedges of lemon.
A biscuit crust filled with sausage, eggs, and cheese. These individual breakfast pies can be made ahead of time, and microwaved as needed. 
This version of sweet pumpkin bread is enhanced with raisins or nuts.
An easy, crowd-pleasing breakfast casserole with a crouton and Cheddar cheese base. This recipe calls for bell pepper and bacon, but you can have fun playing with the ingredients to dress it up or down, depending on the occasion.
Banana bread is one of those things people rarely make on purpose, only when those last three bananas are almost black. This scrumptious banana-walnut loaf, spiked with dark chocolate chips, is so good you'll want to make it well before the bananas get to that condition.
These light and fluffy scrambled eggs  are a snap to put together for a big crowd. I usually make 2 pans for our Christmas Brunch, and I never have much left over!
These French crepes are thin and delicate pancakes that can be filled with anything you like, such as fresh fruit, chocolate sauce, and whipped cream.
This is an easy, delicious quiche that will take no time to prepare and your friends will ask for the recipe!  I have made this for numerous office gatherings and everyone raves about it!
Classic breakfast favorites come together in this layered hash brown casserole with eggs, cheese, and sausage.
This hearty casserole has bacon, eggs, hash browns, and three different cheeses all baked into a comforting breakfast dish, perfect for feeding a crowd.
The right way to scramble eggs. There is more to just mixing eggs and cooking! This will make a believer out of you.
A tasty frittata made with potatoes, spinach, garlic, green onions, and cheese. Delicious!
Assemble the ingredients the night before, and bake this casserole in the morning. Stand back and wait for the compliments. I've made it with fat free cottage cheese, egg substitute, and reduced fat sausage; the taste is still wonderful!
An easy quick bread with a swirl of cinnamon sugar.
This is an easy seafood quiche.  A wonderful brunch recipe, or can also be a good main course for a light dinner. Crab, Swiss cheese and onion combined with eggs milk and flour, then baked in a pie crust.
This baked Denver omelet is really a frittata with ham, bell pepper, onion, and Cheddar cheese -- all the classic ingredients of the original.
With bacon and vegetables in the mix, this egg and hash brown breakfast casserole is a step above the classic.
This very moist pumpkin bread, simply seasoned with pumpkin pie spice, really needs no other adornment.
A one-dish casserole with all of your Sunday morning favorites: sausage, gravy, eggs, cheese, and toast.
For this classic recipe, crumbled bacon, Swiss cheese and a bit of diced onion are scattered in the bottom of a pastry shell and practically drowned in a luscious mixture of cream, eggs, sugar and cayenne pepper. The baked quiche is cooled slightly before being cut into beautiful wedges and served.
A simple French toast recipe that anyone can make. Use your favorite type of bread and serve with your favorite syrup.
This layered breakfast casserole has cheese, eggs, and a whole lot of hearty goodness.
A simple crust-less quiche with spinach, green onions and two cheeses.
Oatmeal is cooked in milk with brown sugar and butter for a tasty butterscotch flavor. The best oatmeal I've ever had. No need to top this with sugar afterwards. Good with or without milk.
An easy to make breakfast casserole with sausage, potatoes, eggs, and mushrooms.
This is a quick and easy recipe for pancakes using self-rising flour.
Hot buttered English muffins, Canadian-style bacon, and poached eggs are topped with a heavenly drizzle of hollandaise sauce. The best brunch in the world!
Pairs wheat germ and whole-wheat pastry flour for a healthy, wholesome breakfast treat.
A refreshing Mexican drink made with rice, milk, vanilla, and cinnamon. A great balance for spicy foods, enjoy this served over ice.
A quick way to make crispy home fries. Great for breakfast or as a side dish.  Potatoes may be shredded and cooked in the same manner for crispy hash browns.
We have made this French Toast for Christmas brunch for twenty four years! It originally came from the East Coast. If you like your French toast firmer, then cut back on the milk.
A wonderful country style baked pancake that's filled with apples and spice.
These are some seriously tasty blueberry pancakes!
Warm sweet apple bread is perfect for breakfast or for a snack. I have enjoyed this recipe many times.
Breakfast quiche with fresh asparagus, bacon and Swiss cheese.
Yummy waffles that are quick and easy to make!
My mom makes the best waffles and I thought I'd share the recipe with the world!
For these two loaves of heavenly quick bread, the flavors and textures of orange, zucchini, chocolate and chopped nuts are marvelously combined.
These chocolate and banana pancakes are a delicious breakfast treat.
The deep banana flavor needs no other adornment in this simple bread with less sugar and fat than other recipes like it.
This is an easy ham and cheese quiche that can be made ahead of time. Directions for freezing are included in the recipe.
A simple but elegant way to make breakfast fast. Put together the night before, and bake while you're in the shower. Serve with lots of extra maple syrup! You may also add extra raisins if you wish.
Slight twist to an old favorite. Chili powder gives the potatoes and onions in this recipe some zing!  I make these for breakfast every Sunday, and my family loves them!
This light, golden baked pancake is fabulous served with maple syrup or your favorite fruit preserves!
Diced ham, Cheddar, and mozzarella dress up this easy egg dish. It's a wonderful brunch dish or company breakfast.
Deliciously sweet banana bread with plenty of vanilla flavor.
Sweet baked oatmeal with eggs, milk and raisins.
Using bacon drippings in the skillet brings added flavor to this breakfast classic.
Wholesome oat and whole wheat banana pancakes will bake up light and fluffy. The secret is letting the pancake batter rest for 5 minutes.
This is a delicious breakfast dish that my mother likes to prepare for Christmas breakfast.  It is easy to prepare, and sets overnight, so in the morning you just put it in the oven and enjoy.
This was passed down from my mother. I don't know where she got it, but it was always a special request at brunches. Serve with maple syrup or apple butter.
This is a no-frills banana bread that is especially quick in the bread machine.
This is an incredible bread. Its moistness comes from the addition of an unusual ingredient: coconut milk! Originally submitted to ThanksgivingRecipe.com.
Prepare this casserole, loaded with bacon, fresh mushrooms, hash browns, onions, and cheese on Christmas Eve. Pop it in the oven first thing on Christmas morning.
Buttermilk and vanilla make for two moist, well-flavored loaves.
These delicious savory tarts are the perfect surprise for hungry brunch guests.
A simple baked French toast that won't have you slaving over a hot stove. An orange batter and caramel pecan coating make this baked French toast so delicious, you won't need any syrup.
This is a recipe I experimented with to try to get a good amount of vitamins, calcium, protein and fiber in my diet. The great part of this is that I don't get bored with it (even though I drink it every day) because I can change the type of fruit I use whenever I want.
This delicious recipe is perfect for our Sabbath morning breakfast.  One recipe is never enough for my family.  The pancakes are always moist and nutritious.  I recommend these pancakes to be eaten with hot cinnamon syrup!
This is the BEST pancake recipe I've tried - nutty, moist, and tasty pancakes!
Great for holidays when there are picky eaters in the crowd.  Can make as many as needed or just one if you like. Got this from an internet friend.  Good served with fruit and coffee cake.
A great way to get your kids to eat greens! You will be amazed by this yummy fruity smoothie. Experiment with different amounts or types of fruit and make your own.
 In this clever recipe, a popular variation on the peanut butter sandwich is made into a bread! It also calls for walnuts.
Try these pancakes made with mashed sweet potatoes, and you may never again want regular pancakes!
A very easy idea with a minimum of fuss or muss for any number of people.  Individual Baked Eggs surrounded by a strip of bacon, and topped with a square of cheese. These eggs take on a very pleasing flavor just by baking instead of cooking them in the more conventional manner. Great not having splatters all over, and being able to do 12 or more eggs at one time.
This omelet is so easy and delicious.  It bakes in the oven, so there is no watching the stove.  My son loves to make it for us.
Eggs, sausage, red bell pepper, and cheese are baked in hash brown potato 'cups' for a delicious breakfast that will feed a crowd.
A simple but satisfying breakfast casserole featuring sausage, cheese and petite potato croquettes.
An easy to make breakfast casserole that is made the night before and then popped in the oven for breakfast.
This is the world's most famous quiche. It's filled with bacon, onion and Swiss cheese.
Place a pan of bacon in a cold oven and allowing it to bake for 14 minutes while the oven is heating is the secret to easy and crisp bacon.
This moist and delicious breakfast bread is a blend of two all-time favorites.
I gave this recipe to my daughter who has 6 children.  They love this, and it is so simple they can make it themselves which they love to do.  If desired, a thin mixture of powder sugar frosting can be poured over warm biscuits.
A classic Quiche Lorraine with bacon, onions, eggs and cheese.
Tender and flavorful banana bread with a minimum of fat.
Perfect for brunch or a simple weeknight supper, this quiche Lorraine is rich, cheesy, and custardy.
Separating the eggs and folding the whipped whites into the batter creates a fluffy pancake that will melt in your mouth.
A delicious breakfast/brunch recipe using hash browns, diced ham, eggs, etc. Easy to make and everyone loves it!
A low-cholesterol version, without eggs, this is a traditional recipe with a rich banana taste.
A yummy and simple breakfast food, and a simple substitute to making cinnamon rolls. Delicious cinnamon biscuits that are baked on the griddle!      
My mother gave me this to use at my mother group. Everyone loved it so I decided to post it and share the great blend of peaches and French toast. Smells great when cooking.
A white soda bread with sour cream and raisins, this rich version is cake-like in texture.
These waffles contain two of our favorite seasonal flavors: pumpkin and apple cider.
A Swiss cheese, spinach and mushroom layer is topped with a thick egg mixture, a layer of ham and a sprinkling of Cheddar. This robust pie is tucked into an oven and baked for an hour. It 's perfect for lunch or brunch.
Tender baby spinach, Parmesan cheese, and a little nutmeg flavor this simple, delicious omelet.
Fluffy pancakes made with homemade soured milk taste like cake and are best served with butter, syrup, and whipped cream.
A delicious quick and easy granola with almonds and dried cranberries that is made on the stovetop.
Light and fluffy pancakes packed with strawberries. The vanilla makes this breakfast seem like dessert! Serve with butter and real maple syrup.
Quick and easy pancakes that are mixed in your blender! Perfect for those mornings when you have to get breakfast on the table but don't have the time to make anything complicated.
French crepes filled with a sweet cream sauce over bananas and topped with whipped cream.
These easy buttermilk waffles are crisp on the outside, tender in the middle, and are a crowd-pleasing weekend breakfast.
These are very light and tender pancakes. These pancakes are excellent with maple syrup.
Sour cream adds richness and tangy flavor to this moist sweet bread.
This yummy sausage, cheese and egg bake will warm you up when it's cold and fill you up when you're hungry!
Breakfast cookies made with whole grains like rolled oats, flax meal, and whole wheat flour have the flavor of dried cherries and chocolate chips for a tasty breakfast on the run.
This is the best banana nut bread I have ever made!  So full of flavor.  I double the recipe and give it as gifts.  Everyone seems to appreciate it.
My husband loves quiche and he asked me if I could try to make him one.  I decided to try a crab quiche, and it was gone in one sitting. You won't be disappointed!
Scrambled eggs with mushrooms, olives, ham, jalapenos, and Cheddar cheese, baked until firm, then cut into individual square portions. Great for a holiday brunch with sausage, and easily adapted with your favorite ingredients.
These delicate crepes are rolled up with a fluffy cream cheese filling and sliced strawberries. Make these as a dessert treat during strawberry season, or for a fancy weekend brunch.
This basic pancake recipe turns into a delicious holiday breakfast simply by adding pumpkin and some fall spices!
Good old-fashioned fried potatoes and bacon topped with melted cheese.
This is a great brunch recipe, it's perfect for large gatherings. A yummy bread casserole baked with sweet apple filling.
This is the real Monte Cristo sandwich. It has a nice thick batter and is absolutely delicious. Enjoy hot sandwich with currant jelly or make a currant sauce with currant jelly, water and heavy cream.
Breakfast is a breeze with this all in one breakfast casserole that has sausage, eggs, cheese, bread.  If you like, add tomatoes and mushrooms too!
These delicious pancakes are said to resemble those from a famous pancake house. The batter rests in the refrigerator for 30 minutes, making the cakes extra fluffy.
These scrambled egg muffins with plenty of sausage and Cheddar cheese make a filling and fun treat at your next brunch. They're pretty, hearty, and fun to serve.
Yummy 'home-style' fried potatoes. Chunky and flavorful fried potatoes with onion, green pepper and parsley.
This is a bread machine recipe for classic banana-nut bread.
Ham, green onions, and hash browns baked with spicy pepperjack cheese make up this easy make-ahead breakfast dish.
A delicious breakfast casserole made with flour tortillas. Enchiladas filled with ham, vegetables and cheese and baked in a creamy egg batter.
Rich and creamy baked blueberry French toast with a special blueberry sauce.
This is a lower calorie quick bread that does not skimp on flavor.  Buttermilk guarantees a moist crumb, too. Great for afternoon snack.
Here is a recipe for a bread machine, though it can easily be done in the conventional, muscle building way. You use the dough only setting and do the rest by hand.  For machines that do 1 1/2 - 2 pound capacity.
This is a big banana-nut loaf with a big banana taste.  Baking powder gives extra leavening.
These waffles taste wonderful, but are simple to make and include self-rising flour instead of yeast.
Simple fried potatoes, with salt, pepper and garlic powder.
Use a blender to whip up this frothy pumpkin spice-flavored latte made with double-strength brewed coffee, milk, sugar, vanilla extract, and pumpkin pie spice.
Polish sausages slices and potatoes are baked together in a creamy sauce to make this hearty brunch casserole.
Enjoy the flavors of eggs Benedict in an easy make-ahead breakfast casserole made with Canadian bacon or ham, English muffins, and hollandaise sauce.
Creamy quiche with Swiss cheese and imitation crab meat.
After living in the Dominican Republic for many years, I came to appreciate their tasty and easy way of making oatmeal. The texture is more creamy and liquidy, and the flavor is comforting in the morning.
For this two-layered, spiced zucchini bread, cocoa and chocolate chips are mixed into half the batter for one of the layers.  You could swirl the contrasting batters for a nifty wavy effect.
Bake a ham and cheese quiche in a pan lined with crispy hash brown potatoes instead of the usual pastry shell.
Spicy seasoned sausage mixed with cream cheese and wrapped in crescent rolls.  For a different variation, add thin slices of pepperoni on the bottom of crescent roll before the sausage mixture and shred cheddar on top of sausage; roll pastry over.
A crust made from dinner roll dough with sausage, hash browns and cheese on top.
This recipe yields nicely  'eggy ' waffles that comes out tender and soft, ready to take on butter and syrup.
Quick Easy and Delicious!  I learned this recipe from many years of eating with the Mexican cooks at my restaurant. They like to sneak in breakfast before we open.  I've grown to LOVE this breakfast.  If you like spicy food, you will love this.
The delicate flavor of fresh pears and pecans dance enchantingly in this lovely summer loaf. Freezes well if double wrapped. Delicious and easy.
A delicious gluten-free pancake with a consistency and taste comparable to those made with wheat flour.
A colorful ham and hash brown casserole with bacon, cheese, and green onions.
Ham and potato casserole in a creamy sauce. Drizzling butter on top is the key to a delicate golden crust.
This recipe is so delicious and easy to make.  I come from a really Swedish town - Rockford, Illinois - where Swedish pancakes are a favorite for Sunday morning breakfast.  My Dad used to make these for us at home for a special treat. Serve with butter and maple syrup, or lingonberries if you've got them.
Real Irish soda bread was and is a simple loaf made with just a few ingredients, swiftly put together and baked. Here's an old family recipe for your St. Patrick's Day festivities.
These paleo-style, muffin-shaped omelets with meat and vegetables are easy to make and easily adaptable.
These classic diner-style hash browns are crispy on the outside and fluffy on the inside.
Light and fluffy pancakes flavored with cinnamon and vanilla will go perfectly with maple or berry syrup.
Make this the night before and enjoy brunch with your kids rather than catering to them!  Also great for taking places because the syrup is built-in.
Eggs are baked in a spicy marinara sauce and topped with cream and Parmigiano-Reggiano, for a rich and creamy brunch dish.
A delicious breakfast indulgence, perfect for those crisp autumn Saturday mornings.
An oven pancake that puffs up and falls. It is served with a squeeze of lemon juice and powdered sugar. We also enjoy them topped with fresh strawberries and whipped cream. Serves 2 to 4.
This banana bread is wonderful warm with butter. It is a lovely gift in small loaf pans. If pecans aren't your favorite, substitute walnuts.
Two cheeses, bacon and green chiles make this easy quiche a real flavor bomb! Cut off a piece savor the explosion!
My family loves it when I make this variation of French toast that my grandma once made for me. It's a GREAT substitute for sticky cinnamon rolls and a lot less hassle ... ENJOY!
Quick and easy to make, oh so fruity, and very yummy!!
These are your basic griddle cakes, easy to make and easy to eat.
This egg casserole has a little zip to it due to the pepperjack cheese! A big hit at church brunches
A smooth drink that is a meal in itself. Banana, milk and a nice raw egg - all topped off with a pinch of cinnamon. This recipe contains raw eggs. We recommend that pregnant women, young children, the elderly and the infirm do not consume raw eggs.
This is a great smoothie for breakfast - and sometimes dinner! You can substitute the orange juice with any mix of juices or even soy milk! The soy milk adds more of a milk shake quality than the juice does.
You can add other meats or veggies to suite your taste, and this quiche can be baked with or without pie shells.
Tender and chewy, with a light touch of cinnamon, this quick bread is perfect for a winter morning.
A combination of corned beef, potatoes, and onions. A quick and easy meal.
Crescent roll dough is covered with ham, eggs, and cheese and then formed into a braid shape in this easy and impressive breakfast dish.
These cookies are a delicious grab-and-go treat. Try one with your morning coffee or pack one in your lunch.
I got this recipe from my friends mom who owns a Mexican Bakery. When they made these one day for my family they loved them - even my brother who is sooo picky. Now they ask for them all the time.  Although they are a little time consuming it is well worth it at the end!
Bacon, eggs, cheese and onions. It's a delicious way to start a meal!
Quick, easy and delicious. Serve with lemon wedges, warm maple syrup and jam.
Enjoy this classic and simple shrimp and grits dish for breakfast, lunch, or dinner.
A little like a quiche, a little like a pie--and the best of both. This easy crustless quiche is made with zucchini, baking mix, and Parmesan cheese.
Swiss cheese, Monterey Jack cheese and ham are married with green pepper and onions in a savory custard. This recipe makes 2 quiches.
This is a moist, delicious, not too sweet bread.  It is a favorite with family and friends.
Almond flour pancakes are naturally gluten free and a delicious and filling way to start your day. Serve with your favorite pancake toppings.
An easy to make crispy cinnamon French toast that will light up your morning.
A recipe for when you run out of milk but still want pancakes! Substitute root beer to make it kid-friendly. 
Use a star shaped cookie cutter to make these beautiful French toast stars. With their delicate orange flavor, they're sure to be the star of any breakfast table.
This is a good, old-fashioned way of making delicious French toast. To add a little pizzazz to it, sprinkle on some cinnamon after dipping the bread into the batter. Serve hot with butter and maple syrup.
This smoothie is so bright, cheerful, and delicious, it is like a blast of sunshine on even the most rainy, windy days!
A baked egg mixture tops layers of thin bagel slices, cheese, and bacon!
Brown sugar contributes to the richness of this traditional loaf that 's peppered with nuts and raisins.
This bread is great lightly toasted for breakfast or anytime!
Frozen dough and butterscotch pudding mix to get the job done much more quickly.  The pudding mix, nuts, cinnamon sugar and butter make a gooey pullapart bread everyone will want to get their hands on.
A delightful meatless quiche that's easy to prepare, and looks and tastes like you spent all day in the kitchen!
This recipe makes a simple, sweet blueberry quick bread with walnuts. It yields one extra-large loaf, or two smaller ones.
A baked egg casserole with cheese, ham and green onions.
Whisk all the ingredients for pancakes together and bake in a pie pan for quick and easy baked pancakes. Serve with lemon juice and confectioners' sugar.
This Tunisian and Israeli dish is like a Mediterranean version of huevos rancheros. Fried eggs simmer in a sauce of tomatoes, onions, colorful bell peppers, chile peppers, and spices.
This is perfect served with quiche, homemade home fries and fresh coffee!  I make the bread for this recipe using my bread machine!
A basic version of Irish Soda Bread that is baked in a cast iron skillet.  Try substituting the liquid with buttermilk or 2)1/2c cream plus 1/2c sour cream left to sit overnight. Try adding a tablespoon or so of sugar if you like your soda bread slightly sweet. Experiment until you get the flavor you remember.
My Norwegian grandmother made this for us as a treat, and it continues to be a favorite my mother makes for my kids.  Very easy and versatile.  Serve rolled like a crepe with syrup or jam.  Can also be a dessert stuffed with a sweetened cream cheese and lingon berry mixture.
Tender pancakes made with cottage cheese and served with syrup.
One of the easiest and best tasting recipes for breakfast!  Remember, when planning to make these, they must rise overnight!  My mom made these for us when we were young...I remember waking up to the wonderful aroma of them baking!
A very TASTY way to add zip to scrambled eggs.
Ginger, vanilla, and molasses make these dark pancakes taste like gingerbread!
Egg casserole is a delicious dish and is super quick and easy to make; your family will be thrilled and so will you!
This thick batter yields some seriously moist and delicious pancakes. What a great way to start the morning!
You'll never buy a fast food breakfast again once you've learned how to make these quick and easy egg and cheese sandwiches in your own kitchen.
Whole wheat flour and wheat germ give a mild, nutty undertone that complements the chopped pecans in this honey-sweetened bread.
Have this sausage, egg, and hash browns casserole on Sunday morning or whenever you'd like a tasty breakfast treat.
Crispy, golden and cheesy! Good use of leftover mashed potatoes. This recipe is very versatile: you can add minced garlic, chives, or 1/4 cup of any shredded raw vegetable, or substitute the cheese with a tablespoon of sugar and serve with maple syrup.
Oven pancakes are great for Sunday breakfast! They're easy to make and go well with everything.
This no-cook overnight oatmeal, made with oats, chia seeds, Greek yogurt, and fruit, is a hearty, on-the-go breakfast option for busy school mornings.
You won't miss the coffee in this creamy and satisfying pumpkin and spice latte. For a special treat, top with whipped cream and a pinch of nutmeg.
This is my husband's favorite use of leftover hard boiled Easter eggs.  Great comfort food!
There's nothing too fancy about this rustic Spanish style omelet, just lots of hearty goodness from crispy fried potatoes and onions. Chopped tomatoes and green onions lend even more flavor and color.
Almond, butter and orange flavorings distinguish this bread that has an especially stronger poppy seed component to set it apart.
Sour cream and milk make these oven baked eggs extra fluffy. Melted cheese completes this easy breakfast treat.
A fragrant array of spices -cinnamon, nutmeg, cloves and allspice -accent this moist pumpkin-nut bread peppered with juicy raisins.  The generous recipe makes three loaves, so plan on giving some away to friends and family.
Tired of the same old waffles? Try this cocoa flavored variation.
Nutrient-rich kale is hidden in this delicious banana smoothie. . . perfect for those of us who have a hard time getting our daily dose of veggies!
A sweet and savory oven pancake with cheese, bacon and maple syrup.
This rich recipe is great for either a brunch or breakfast. You can make this a day ahead if you want to serve it for an early morning breakfast. Just reheat in the microwave. You may use any combination of cheese in this recipe, even non-fat.
For amazing French toast, use this two-step method. And everyone--including the cook--gets to sit down for breakfast at the same time!
Swiss and Cheddar cheeses are baked into this veggie and bacon quiche that's certain to please.
Looking for a vegetable with super health powers? Try spinach. It's packed with vitamins, minerals and antioxidants that protect you all your life.
Start your day off right with this quick and easy casserole that's packed with sausage, hash browns, eggs, and Cheddar cheese.
One of the best quiches I have ever had. Delicious and filling. Also great for dinner.
This is a great breakfast item, now a tradition for my family. It tastes like French toast without the bread!
Oatmeal so creamy it's like tapioca! You will absolutely love this recipe. This is how oatmeal was meant to be!
Grits are a must for breakfast in some parts of the world. They are baked with sausage, eggs, and cheese in this fantastic breakfast casserole.
Potatoes, onions, ham and eggs make this a frittata that's sure to please everyone.
Delicious waffles with banana cooked inside the waffle!
Baked eggs in avocado halves are topped with bacon creating a delicious and satisfying paleo breakfast or snack.
You can use all whole wheat flour and still have light, fluffy pancakes with this recipe that calls for plenty of buttermilk.
These cornbread pancakes are requested regularly by my family for breakfast.  The recipe is easy to throw together and the taste is yummy!
My mother Shelly Rice created the ultimate Basic Quiche recipe . . . almost anything can be added to make this basic quiche conform to your tastes, or it can be left plain for those with simple tastes.
These blintz-like pancakes are simple, easy to make, and delicious.
This is a tasty, protein-filled vegetarian meal. The recipe is really quite quick. Get the onions in, put the lentils on, then prep the rest of the ingredients. Once you've got the quiche in the oven, you've got 45 minutes of spare time!
A great solution for busy mornings. Just put the ingredients in your slow cooker before going to bed, and it will be ready for breakfast.
Great for breakfast! Leftover mashed potatoes are fried into pancakes with a cheese surprise in the middle.
Eat your muesli! If you've never tried this granola-like breakfast treat, this is a great recipe. Lots of bran and oats and raisins and nuts, with just enough brown sugar to add a bit of sweetness. Serve as is with soy milk, or plop the bowl in the microwave and eat it warm.
Cute quiches that are as tasty as they look. Perfect finger food for parties, these one-bite wonders will make any party into an event.
This better-for-you version of pumpkin bread substitutes applesauce for the vegetable oil.
Strawberries and bananas are blended with yogurt and milk in this easy and delicious smoothie.
A wonderful, delightful fruit smoothie...it will help you cool down after a hot day in the sun.
This is a wonderful, simple recipe for an apple cinnamon oatmeal.  Even the kids can make this one!
A hearty ham and cheese breakfast casserole with a crispy cornflakes topping.
This recipe will make 2 loaves of chewy English muffin bread. It's leavened with yeast and baking soda.
Sandwich scrambled eggs between two slices of toast with a little mustard and mayo in this recipe that's been handed down through the generations.
This delicious and creamy oatmeal is slow-cooked overnight with apples, cinnamon, cranberries, almonds, and pecans. 
Cooked corned beef, potatoes, and shredded carrot, all pan-fried until browned, makes a lovely hash for dinner, breakfast, or an Irish brunch.
The French surely have a way with these simple ingredients of egg, milk and flour. Swirl them together in a pan with melted butter for these delectable, ultra-thin pancakes that can be topped with powdered sugar. A Delicious simple recipe for the morning. You can double it to to make more.
These sweet, rich waffles have been in my husbands family for generations. It is sure to be a family favorite.
Your family will love this classic oven-baked French toast sweetened with a buttery combination of cinnamon and brown sugar.
Muffin tins are lined with bread and filled with crumbled bacon, an egg, and a sprinkling of cheese, then baked. Add this bacon, egg, and toast cup recipe to your collection of easy brunch recipes for a crowd.
This potato and cheese frittata is great by itself or with some fruit on a Sunday morning.
Apples are baked into a breakfast cake. This is so delicious that you don't need to add any syrup. A great alternative to regular pancakes.
This granola is good and crunchy with lots of sweet flavor, thanks to the pure maple syrup and dark brown sugar.
Cream cheese and raspberry jam sandwiches are transformed into wonderful slices of stuffed French toast! Feel free to experiment with this recipe - it's very versatile.
An icy fruit blend of fresh strawberries, orange juice and ice.
This is a granola recipe fortified with wheat germ and flax seed that still tastes good.
This blueberry, banana, and flax smoothie is to die for!  It tastes so good, you forget that it's good for ya!
Brown sugar and cinnamon add depth to this moist, sweet banana bread.
Perfect for a special breakfast or brunch, this make-ahead eggy casserole combines toasted English muffins with layers of cheese, mushrooms, and asparagus. Refrigerate overnight, bake the next day, and keep your morning clear for celebrating instead of cooking.
Zucchini and summer squash are baked together in a quiche-like vegetable pie.  Topped with slices of tomato and Parmesan cheese, this one's a winner!
Lemon zest and nuts flavor this moist loaf that 's intensified with a lemon-sugar glaze.
Eggs, cream cheese, and cream of tartar are baked together forming cloud bread, a gluten-free fluffy bread substitute.
Simple, yet delicious! These potatoes, when young, are so good by themselves they don't need anything else.  This would be great as a breakfast side dish.
A versatile breakfast casserole which can be adapted to fit your needs or tastes.
Very moist banana bread containing applesauce and spiced with cinnamon and nutmeg. Raisins and walnuts are optional.
Lemon cake and pudding mixes combine forces with a scoop of poppy seeds to make one of the easiest versions of this popular dessert bread.
A great way to get a serving of whole grains and a yellow vegetable in the morning! (Even my three year old liked it!)
Make this frittata even easier by using cooked bacon from the freezer. It's a wonderful dish to serve at brunch or to take as leftovers for lunch.
This is THE BEST granola out there. Walnuts, pecans, coconut, sesame seeds and honey are just a few of the delectable ingredients that make this the most delicious and nutty granola out there, you won't be disappointed!
This is an excellent recipe for blueberry pancakes. A delicious, nutritious and flavorful breakfast. When blueberries are out of season, use thawed frozen blueberries.
These two loaves of moist, dense pumpkin nut bread get their pizzazz from lots of cinnamon, allspice, and nutmeg.
Half the measuring is done for you because this recipe calls for a baking mix (e.g. Bisquick). Just add the moist ingredients and nuts, mix and bake.
This lovely bread promises a mild persimmon flavor and a hint of nutmeg. This recipe makes three sweet, smaller loaves that would make perfect gifts!
My family loves these as a side dish or for Sunday brunch.  Delicious topped with sour cream and green onions or applesauce.
My Husband is in the artillery and every time he goes out to the field this is what he and the guys on his gun request.  They were the ones that came up with the name for this wonderful drink.  I love to bring it with us when we camp as well.  We love it!
Home fries with lots of garlic and potato flavor - a big hit every time!
A basic crepes recipe which you can fill with your favorite fruit preserves or savory filling.
A quick, cool, tasty treat, perfect for a hot summer day!
Hash brown potatoes, Cheddar cheese, ham, and eggs are baked together into a breakfast casserole cleverly named "wake-up casserole".
Chef John bakes thick center-cut bacon with a brown sugar, rice vinegar, and maple syrup glaze for a smoky, crunchy, and sweet party snack.
Bananas, milk, a hint of brown sugar, cold water, and crushed ice make a refreshing not-too-thick smoothie.
A delicious and easy Christmas Eve recipe for your family.
This warm and nutty banana bread tastes great on a cold winter morning!
Raspberry puree blended with cream cheese is sandwiched in between slices of French bread, then battered and browned for an extra scrumptious brunch treat. Fun for kids to help make, too!
Eggs combine with cheese, bacon, and bread to become a fluffy cheese strata that no one can resist! This is an easy recipe for guys who want to surprise that special someone with breakfast in bed!
This is an easy to make tostada-type breakfast that will definitely satisfy your hunger until lunch.
This is a recipe from a cafe in Santa Fe, New Mexico. They are good with maple syrup or, if you're ambitious, with homemade peach or raspberry spread. This recipe serves four people, fewer if they're very hungry.
Easy to make mini quiche that are baked in a muffin tin.
A hearty bowl of steel-cut oats has the delicious spiced flavor of carrot cake, full of raisins and apple, and topped with crunchy pecans and yogurt.
A quick, tropical, fruity smoothie with just 4 ingredients!
Jumbo breakfast cookies made with rolled oats, raisins, and cereal are perfect for grabbing on the way out the door.  
Here's a quick and easy banana pancake recipe that anyone can make.
Hash browns make a surprising and delicious crust in this ham and cheese quiche.
This flavorful crustless quiche is loaded with so many veggies and Cheddar cheese you won't even miss the crust.
Fun bird nests made from baked hash brown potatoes enclose beaten egg, bacon, and cheese for a recipe that's perfect for an Easter brunch or a tasty grab-and-go breakfast.
Pancakes just taste better made from scratch, and these are no exception. A mixture of white and buckwheat flour and buttermilk add a special taste and texture. They puff and brown beautifully. Best we 've tasted.
You do most of the leg work the night before so the bread and apples can really soak up the flavors. In the morning, simply pop them in the oven and prepare the luscious caramel sauce to ladle over all.
Not your typical zucchini quiche. This fantastic medley of fresh veggies may be served either hot or cold. You can even cut it into small pieces and serve as finger food!
A mixture of all things good about breakfast.  Potatoes, bacon, cheese and eggs are baked into one easy to make dish. It presents beautifully and is excellent for company.
A delicious French toast and bacon sandwich.
Tired of plain old waffles? Do you love French toast, but don't like the hassle? Then  try this recipe that combines the ease of waffles with the taste of French toast!
Miniature frittatas are baked in a muffin tin creating perfect, individual egg dishes for brunch or on-the-go breakfast.
An alternative to crepes made with flour, these easy, thin pancakes contain eggs but no sugar or wheat flour. Cream cheese is the magic that holds them together. Serve with your favorite filling or just top them with sugar-free syrup.
You 'll get two loaves of delicious bread made moist with applesauce, and sour cream or buttermilk.
A simple and hearty ham and cheese breakfast casserole.
Quiche with crunchy potato crust. A good one dish meal and a great way to use leftovers. You may also use 1 cup chopped vegetables of your choosing, such as onions, peppers, broccoli or tomatoes, etc.
The batter for these tender and crunchy yeasted waffles is mixed the night before you make them, giving them a delicious tangy flavor.
Sausage, eggs and seasoning baked into savory 'muffins'.
A yummy, kid-approved gluten-free banana bread that will satisfy your pickiest eaters!
Spinach, mushrooms, feta, and Swiss cheeses fill this moist veggie quiche with flavor. Add sausage if you like. The recipe is easily doubled.
A different way to start your day.  Burritos with fried eggs, bacon and refried beans topped with melted cheese.  Ham or sausage may be substituted for the bacon.  Serve with salsa on the side.
This sweet yeast bread, or pan dulce, is baked for the November 2 celebration known as the Dia de los Muertos (Day of the Dead) in Mexico.
This was my husband's favorite breakfast growing up in a Mexican household. Now we make it all times of day and even our kids always ask for seconds. Very simple, inexpensive, and quick to make. I sometimes add hot pepper sauce, or ingredients you would like in a omelet, but my husband prefers it the traditional way.
A delicious microwave egg and cheese sandwich on toast.
Prepare day ahead and pop in the oven on a holiday morning! You may substitute ham or sausage for the bacon or the broccoli if you wish.
No one will leave the table hungry after a breakfast of biscuits and hearty Southern-style sausage gravy.
Canned green chiles and lots of shredded cheese bake up into a meltingly good, easy dinner.
This bread is a holiday favorite in our family. It's very festive and is a wonderful breakfast bread for Thanksgiving and Christmas morning. I like to prepare my bread batter ahead of time and thaw it out the night before I serve it. Just pop it in the oven in the morning and you have fresh breakfast bread. Enjoy!
This sweet, crunchy homemade granola combines quick oats with peanuts, wheat germ, honey, brown sugar, and vanilla. Baked in the oven, it's easy to make.
Bake ham and cheese in a classic custard of eggs and milk, because sometimes the simplest ideas are the best. Hint: be sure to thoroughly grease your baking dish. For a little variation toss in a few sliced scallions or some freshly snipped herbs.
Quick and easy egg-and-biscuit breakfast cups are the perfect way to start the day!
Fried tortilla chips are cooked with eggs, salsa, and cheese. Don't wait to try this Mexican favorite!
Fried potatoes with bacon, onion and cheddar cheese.
Spinach, Cheddar cheese, bacon, eggs, and cream make up the delectable filling for this yummy quiche, which is made with a premade pie crust.
Sour cream and 4 bananas make this loaf of banana bread moist and flavorful. It freezes well, too.
An easy, delicious recipe that will become a family favorite. Add more veggies or more chicken, depending on how you and your family like it.
Yummy pancakes with the unexpected addition of ricotta cheese and blueberries. Serve with your favorite condiments.
Adding instant cream of wheat to the pancake batter gives these yummy pancakes a protein boost.
This is a  soft cakey cookie you will love; it is made with raisins, walnuts, fruit puree and rolled oats.
Hash brown potatoes are baked in a creamy, cheesy sauce for a brunch main dish or a nice side for dinner.
A delicious casserole - elegant enough for a Sunday brunch!
Thick and healthy fruit drink with apple, banana and orange juice. The frozen banana takes the place of shaved ice and results in a smooth, creamy texture. Serve with dollop of whipped cream for added effect.
A quick, versatile potato casserole with lots of bacon and cheese; it's sure to be a family favorite.
Just enough cheese, and not much milk make these the best scrambled eggs you can have for breakfast (the bacon and onion help too)!
This tropical fruit mimosa is a wonderful change, and will serve several people too!
Dried cranberries add plenty of zing to this bread machine loaf.
Applesauce and cinnamon add a sweet and moist variation to the classic batter of milk, eggs and sugar.
My Mama Bear made this for us all the time! Even oatmeal haters might like this version.  It's sweet and custardy, and keeps you full 'till lunchtime.  By the way, don't balk at the 'raw eggs' that get stirred in - the hot porridge cooks them completely.
Pumpkin pie lovers rejoice! Now you can have your pie for breakfast.
An easy quick bread with plenty of zing, this pumpkin bread features nuts, orange zest and the tartness of whole berry cranberry sauce mixed in.
Chicken combines with hash browns, sour cream, ham and cheese for a filling, one-stop morning feast.
A lightly seasoned onion and cheese quiche that's sure to please.
Craving pancakes, but all you have is soy milk? Then this is the perfect solution!
Japanese comfort food, Oyakodon is chicken meat and beaten eggs, simmered in a sweet and savory stock, and eaten over cooked rice in a bowl. Try it for breakfast some cold morning.
If you love French toast and you love peanut butter, why not combine them into one easy, delish recipe? Top with sliced strawberries or bananas.
Use the dough cycle of your bread machine to make two delicious loaves of cinnamon-walnut bread. Once the dough is ready, it's simple to form the spiral loaves and bake them in the oven. Your house will smell like heaven.
Banana, spinach, and peanut butter blend with yogurt and milk for a power-packed smoothie.
A rich popover pancake served with melted butter, powder sugar, lemon wedges or fresh fruit.  A dish that's well known in Seattle, Washington.
Reminiscent of apricots and honey, persimmons make a lovely bread when gently spiced with cinnamon, and augmented with raisins and chopped walnuts.
Great directions to make the most perfect, fluffy and foldable omelet. Stuffed with gently sauteed vegetables and lots of cheese. Yummy indeed.
I am a French Canadian from Montreal, this recipe is one of the first ones that I learned as a child growing up and can either be served traditional style with REAL maple syrup on top or cold with ice cream rolled into it and chocolate syrup on top as a desert.
A delicious, simple zucchini souffle recipe for all the zucchini lovers out there.
Wonderfully peachy cottage cheese pancakes that are sure to please.
After much experimentation I finally got this smoothie recipe right. Frozen berries, strawberry yogurt and a whole banana are pureed in blender for a delicious, drinkable treat.
Brown and white sugars, carrots, pecans and vanilla extract distinguish this easy quick bread.
This cheese crusted quiche is great for vegetarian brunch guests.
Quick, easy, delicious zucchini bread.  Freezes very well so no fear with the overflowing garden veggie. You may omit the walnuts if you wish.
Adding zucchini, Parmesan cheese, and garlic powder to eggs makes for a delicious meal at any time of day.
The pearl sugar softens under the heat of the iron and creates areas that are crispy and sweet throughout the waffles.
Thanks to Chef John you finally have a buckwheat buttermilk pancakes recipe that will start your morning off with a smile.
Lightly sweetened iced coffee with just a hint of vanilla. Yum!
A traditional brunch beverage.  Enjoy this light delight on Mother's Day, Christmas, or any special occasion.
The perfect brunch offering, this quiche is packed with the flavors of bacon, hot sauce, Cheddar cheese, eggs, and evaporated milk to make it creamy, thick, and delicious. The crust is made with baking mix, so it is heartier than a flaky pastry. Serve warm or at room temperature.
Nothing makes biscuits better than being smothered in a Southern-style bacon gravy. Delightful!
Ramen noodles are baked into a frittata and topped with shredded cheese. My kids love this frittata for lunch!  It's so easy to make!
A deliciously sweet smoothie made with banana, strawberries, yogurt and honey.
A variety of veggies combined with eggs make a great start to the day.
Whether you use your favorite pancake recipe or use a mix, this baked pancake can be whipped up in minutes! Serve with warm maple syrup or fresh apple butter.
Pumpkin pie for breakfast? That's what it's like eating these yummy waffles!
Bread cubes, strawberries, and cream cheese are baked into a sweet French toast casserole in this easy make-ahead recipe for weekend brunch.
We prepare these on Christmas Eve to eat for breakfast on Christmas Day before opening our gifts.
The Tuck U Inn at Glick Mansion in Atchison, Kansas serves this for breakfast. People just rave about the caramel, candy coating combination on the bacon!
Shredded zucchini and Cheddar cheese give these savory pancakes a splash of color and a hint of richness. Serve for brunch, lunch, or dinner!
Quick, easy, and delicious, these light and flavorful pumpkin pancakes are best when served warm with butter and syrup.
For a special holiday breakfast or brunch treat, use eggnog, pumpkin pie spice, and cinnamon to make the custard for French toast. Cook in an electric skillet or on a stovetop griddle, and serve warm with powdered sugar and maple syrup.
Oatmeal porridge with brown sugar, butter and non-dairy creamer.
Toasted almonds make a delectable coating for tasty French toast!
My dad makes these pancakes. They are the BEST! A large batch of whole wheat pancakes to feed a crowd.
We make this every year for Halloween dinner.  It would also be good for Thanksgiving morning breakfast and the whipped cream would be great on pumpkin pie.
Fresh asparagus and mushrooms are wonderful when baked together in a cheesy frittata!
Sweet blueberries and tart lemon pair well in this quinoa alternative to oatmeal for a warm breakfast cereal.
A yummy breakfast burrito of cooked, crumbled chorizo sausage with onions and scrambled eggs mixed throughout. Serve on warm flour tortillas with a generous helping of shredded Cheddar cheese for the perfect hangover cure!
Pumpkin puree, milk, brown sugar, and cinnamon are all you need to make this fall smoothie.
A delicious and satisfying breakfast casserole.
Plain yogurt, shredded apples and cinnamon grace these pancakes.
This very simple casserole is made with sausage, cream cheese, and crescent roll dough.
This is an absolutely FANTASTIC brunch recipe. French bread, Italian sausage, two kinds of cheese, and a little white wine flavor this make-ahead breakfast casserole.
Peanut butter and banana is a favorite flavor combination for many. Put it in your pancakes using this recipe.
Keep a container of this handy homemade baking mix in your pantry for quick pancakes or waffles anytime you get a craving.
Gluten-free bread can taste just like traditional white bread by using sorghum flour, rice flour, and potato starch to make a nice, crusty loaf.
Pan-fried French toast forms the basis for a delectable brunch main dish when topped with ham, two kinds of cheese, and perfectly poached eggs for a twist on the Monte Cristo sandwich.
These waffles substitute sour cream and yogurt for milk. The inspiration came about one morning when there was no milk in the house.
These dainty sweet crepes await your favorite dessert fillings, be they as simple as jam or ice cream, or as complicated as Cherries Jubilee.  At least the crepes themselves are easily made!
If you're looking for a sweet banana bread, this recipe is for you.
A moist and tender quick bread that's packed with fiber.
Potatoes, peppers, onion and mushrooms are all fried up with bacon, and smothered with cheese. Top with sunnyside-up eggs (or your favorite style) and serve with toast or muffins on the side.
Include quick-cooking oats to your pancake batter for a hearty addition to the breakfast plate. Serve with your favorite sweet topping.
This cheesy deep-dish quiche is loaded with onion, bell pepper, mushroom, and zucchini.
Warm up the kitchen on a holiday morning with a ham, egg, and cheese casserole for a filling and rich breakfast dish.
Little dough balls - conveniently prepared with the help of the bread machine - are stuffed with three all time morning favorites - sausage, cheese and potatoes.
Banana, honey and nutmeg are blended with milk in this healthy smoothie. Soy milk can be used if you prefer.
Like english muffins, slices of this bread must be toasted to taste right.  Grandma used to bake this in large greased cans coated with cornmeal, which added to the english muffin appearance.  Today she uses non-stick pans.
These moist, banana-dense nut loaves are delightfully spiced with cinnamon, cloves and nutmeg.
This simple quiche is a versatile dish that can be served with almost anything.
This creamy breakfast quiche is a delightful treat.
Fluffy pancakes with ground flax seed and blueberries for a healthier, fiber filled pancake.
Savory bites of quinoa, eggs, zucchini, cheese, and ham are equally excellent hot or cold. Ideal for breakfast, brunch, lunch, or dinner.
These savory potato waffles are similar to potato pancakes, but in waffle form. The batter consists of onion, garlic, and mashed potatoes cooked until golden brown in your waffle iron. Serve with fish or chicken and sauteed apples.
Perfect for brunch, this beautiful braid is filled with eggs, ham, and cheese. Using refrigerated crescent rolls makes it a snap to prepare.
A quick and easy breakfast when you don't have time to cook or do dishes afterwards.
Ricotta cheese adds moisture, lemon zest bright flavor, and the self-rising flour makes Chef John's delicious lemon ricotta pancakes so light they nearly float off the plate.
Adding sugar and cinnamon to the batter helps make these waffles plenty tasty without the aid of maple syrup.
Maple bacon monkey bread has a wonderful mix of sweet and salty and will make everyone happy at brunch.
Steel cut oats, ground beef, and ground pork are cooked until thick and soft, chilled until firm, and fried like bacon!
You can use fresh or frozen fruit in this yummy smoothie.
A touch of the Hawaiian Islands highlights this sweet zucchini-nut bread.  No spices are called for;  the rich sweetness of pineapple and raisins provide ample interest.
A fast and healthy breakfast cereal or high-energy snack. Oatmeal made with coconut, raisins, cranberries, walnuts. Brown rice can be used in place of oatmeal.
This is an interesting concoction featuring eggs, cheese, and flour. To add a little extra kick, add a small can of diced chiles or jalapenos into the mix. Serve with sour cream, salsa, and green taco sauce.
Light, fluffy lemon ricotta pancakes are topped with blueberry sauce to create a delicious breakfast treat!
These mini bacon and spinach quiches are great low-carb, on-the-go breakfast items for busy weekday mornings.
Rhubarb bread topped with a buttery cinnamon topping is the perfect way to use extra rhubarb from your garden.
This oatmeal recipe has the flavors of soy milk, pumpkin, cinnamon, walnuts, and honey.
A blend of strawberries, blueberries, bananas, orange juice and the creaminess of yogurt.
Berries provide the filling for these simple crepes using whole wheat flour, egg whites, and skim milk.
Eggs, sausage, cheese, and Southwest spices are baked in a 9x13 inch pan. I've used this yummy recipe several times with great success.
These are made in muffin tins and are fun to whip up and to eat. A cumin and lemon-spiced egg mixture is stirred into spinach, ricotta, parmesan and cheddar cheese. Then this delicious batter is poured into the waiting pan and baked.
An easy-to-make dish with baking mix, bacon, Swiss cheese, and eggs, this pie is welcome at breakfast, brunch, or as a quick supper.
Both all-purpose and whole-wheat flours are used in this heartier sweet bread.  Extra nutty flavor comes from both walnuts and wheat germ.
Layers of canned green chiles and cheddar cheese are baked with an egg filling. This casserole is also great when made with fresh long green chiles. Makes a wonderful brunch dish, but we also have it for lunch quite often.
When I plan brunch for a crowd, strata is one of the first dishes on my list. And I'm not alone in loving this easy breakfast casserole. So enjoy creating your own combinations using ingredients that are in season or on hand, and be prepared for compliments.
Lemon zest and mascarpone are stuffed into thick white bread slices, dipped in batter, pan fried, and smothered in fresh peach sauce. This recipe is great for breakfast and fancy enough for dessert.
Quinoa, rolled oats, and oat bran are cooked into a delicious hot cereal with banana and walnuts to help satisfy you and keep you full.
These sweet and fluffy crepes are a big hit in my home!
This is a sweet and slightly gooey chocolate pancake that is great with fresh fruit.
A hearty bacon, egg, and hash brown casserole for the bacon lover in all of us. Feel free to use turkey bacon rather than pork!
Layered with black beans along with fresh salsa and shredded Monterey Jack cheese, this is a delicious version of the classic Spanish or Mexican "rancher's eggs" dish.
Overripe bananas lend an extra sweetness and a deeper banana taste to this popular bread.  This is a low-fat loaf, too, because it does not call for shortening, oil or butter.
Maple syrup, almonds, raisins, cinnamon, and cardamom dress up leftover cooked rice in this recipe for a rice pudding-like hot cereal.
A few splashes of your favorite chai (spiced Indian tea) add a complex spiciness to this banana bread. And non-fat cream cheese adds rich flavor without the guilt.
Slightly sweet, this pumpkin yeast bread is deftly spiced with cinnamon, nutmeg and ginger.
This breakfast pizza topped with eggs, ham, and hollandaise sauce on a crescent roll crust gives you the great flavor of eggs benedict.
Almond flour lends a rich, buttery flavor to these crispy waffles. Try topping them with yogurt and fresh fruit.
This banana bread is almost a cake. It has everything a kid could want, including chocolate chips and peanut butter. It's great for Easter brunch.
This quick and easy breakfast is loaded with protein and flavor from layers of black beans, scrambled eggs, avocado, and salsa.
Cornmeal gives these hearty oatmeal pancakes a crisp texture. Serve it with berries and maple syrup.
Cream of mushroom soup, Cheddar cheese, and breakfast sausage are the cornerstone of this hearty breakfast casserole. 
This flax and kale smoothie doesn't even taste green! Feel free to play with the ingredients. I'm not sure how well other greens go in this smoothie, but the taste of kale is really easy to cover up!
I love Quiche and imitation crab. This combines the best of both worlds. It is a simple and versatile recipe that whips up in a jiffy.
For an elegant brunch treat, serve these delicious crepes with their savory filling and delicate egg sauce.
This easy, basic, yeast, sweet-bread recipe uses only eight ingredients and can be made into dinner rolls, cinnamon rolls or sticky buns.
Sliced potatoes are layered with hard-boiled eggs and baked in a rich sour cream sauce.
A soft, sweet cinnamon yeast bread from your bread machine means that it could already be waiting for you when you 're ready for your morning coffee!
This delicious symphony of asparagus, portobello mushrooms, crispy bacon and onion will leave your taste buds hungry for more. Perfect for breakfast, brunch, lunch or dinner.
When I went on a 6 day kayaking trip, our guides whipped this up one morning over the campfire.  It was delicious and I started making it at home.
This egg quiche with ham, Cheddar cheese, and Swiss cheese is creamy, simple, and delicious!
An egg is cooked inside a bell pepper ring in this quick and easy "egg in a pepper" recipe that is a gluten-free and paleo-friendly breakfast item.
Easy, satisfying, and full of whole grain goodness! Top as desired- I like mine with peanut butter and sugar-free syrup. Also, any chopped fruit, nuts, or chocolate chips could be added to the batter.
Fruity goodness for smoothie lovers!
This is a great breakfast, especially on the weekend.  You fry bacon on a skillet, then after the bacon is crispy, fry eggs in the bacon grease. Garnish your plate with toast or fruit.
A frozen banana and ice cubes give texture to strawberries, blueberries, yogurt and milk, all of which are tossed in a blender for a quick treat. This smoothie recipe is a good base for you to use whatever fruits you have on hand.
You will love these big fluffy pancakes even if you don't like eggnog. It's a great way to start any day, especially Christmas morning. I suggest clarifying the butter but you don't have to if you don't want to.
This delicious pancake of buckwheat, whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour and oats is sweetened with a little honey.
This savory bread pudding combines grated Cheddar cheese, cubed ham, mushrooms, green peppers, and onions for a great make-ahead breakfast treat.
Get tropical with this mango-packed loaf enhanced with cinnamon and raisins. A wonderful summertime snack.
Baking monkey bread in individual muffin cups cuts down baking time and evens out the portion sizes. It's a fast and easy treat that kids love, made with refrigerated biscuit dough, brown sugar, and cinnamon.
Use cottage cheese to elevate scrambled eggs into a creamy and delicious low-carb breakfast.
Breakfast cooks while you sleep thanks to this recipe for a hearty egg- and sausage-stuffed breakfast casserole that is made in a slow cooker.
Having pancake mix ready in your cupboard or pantry makes impromptu brunches a breeze.
Yummy granola!  I learned this recipe while working at a Bed and Breakfast in DC.  All credit goes to "Little Miss Mary!" This recipe calls for 8 ounces of almonds but we recommend using any nuts you desire -- they are all delicious!
This easy casserole is like a crustless quiche. It's filled with ham, onion, red bell pepper, and asparagus, flavored with tarragon, Cheddar, and Parmesan cheese.
You can replace the smoked sausage in this fritatta with other meats or even vegetables. This recipe is great for using up leftovers.
A baked omelet (fritatta) with potato, onion, bell pepper, mushroom, tomato and ham.
This makes a great batter, which then makes a great crepe. Soy milk, hazelnut syrup, water, margarine and flour. Simple. Mix the batter, chill and pour into a hot pan.
The sweet sourdough starter in these flapjacks gives them a marvelous tart cast.
The bread in this dish soaks in eggnog overnight, allowing you a prep-free brunch dish the next morning.
Eggs, cheese, and vegetarian sausage are baked atop a layer of buttery shredded sweet potatoes for a filling breakfast casserole.
Crustless quiche is a quick and easy brunch dish loaded with so much flavor from bacon, Swiss cheese, and asparagus that you won't even miss the crust.
Pesto, goat cheese and sun-dried tomatoes come all together in this quiche that I created myself. This is a perfect combination of flavors that will make you appear like a chef when you serve this plate to your friends.
Spicy sausage, onion and Cheddar join Ranch dressing and hot sauce in this flavorful quiche.
A hearty and homey potato, vegetable and egg scramble.
These yummy pancakes are a snap to make.
By creating a crisp grated Parmesan cheese crust as the base of this omelet, the eggs turn out moist and tender.
Frozen spinach and a prepared pie shell are shortcuts that make this savory spinach and cheese quiche a family-friendly weeknight main dish.
Impress your guests with these clever avocado baked eggs topped with bacon and chives at your next brunch or dinner party.
Spinach and mushrooms are the highlight of this cheese and egg breakfast casserole.
This recipe is perfect for people who can't make good pancakes. Strawberries and the pancake batter are poured into a cast iron skillet and baked in this easy recipe.
Salmon and Cheddar cheese are baked together in this simple, yet sophisticated egg pie.
A hearty blueberry pancake made with quick cooking oats instead of flour.
I created this white chocolate masterpiece for my little sister, Abbey, who's a latte fanatic. She was blown away, and drained it to the last drop! This makes one VERY large, indulgent latte, and could probably serve two. Enjoy!
My take on our corner coffee shop's seasonal pumpkin latte. I loved it so much I HAD to do something! You can use canned 'pumpkin pie mix' if you like, since it contains the pumpkin pie spice ingredients already.
This is a great vegetarian recipe that can be served for any meal.  It's one of my dad's favorites!
Can you say yum!!! I had these at a French breakfast restaurant, this recipe is the closest I can get it. Its so quick and easy but looks and taste like a gourmet breakfast! You can use any fruit you would like - strawberries, kiwi, pineapple are all great too !!
Green chilies and English muffins give this breakfast strata a spicy and new twist on the traditional recipe. Assemble the night before and just bake in the morning for a perfect brunch!
Inspired by eggs Benedict, poached eggs sit atop slices of tomato and mozzarella cheese in this delicious vegetarian breakfast.
Looking for ideas for the quinoa you picked up at Trader Joe's?  Here's a dairy and wheat free breakfast porridge thick, rich and delish for those cold mornings in the Andes.  Those with nut allergies may wish to substitute soymilk or regular cow's milk for the almond.  Adjust sugar to your taste or substitute with agave syrup or black strap molasses (use half as much). This recipe can easily be doubled.
The homemade version of fast food breakfast biscuits. You can exchange toppings to fit your taste buds. My kids love them!
Frozen berries and peaches are blended to make a delicious and healthy fruit smoothie.
This is a crisp, rosemary-scented alternative to fried potatoes. Dee-lish!!!
 Tangy sourdough griddle cakes are every bit as easy to whip up as regular pancakes, but even more delicious!
This is a tasty scramble of scrambled eggs, cheese, and pieces of sausage. Great for a Sunday morning family breakfast! You may use as much of whatever type of cheese you prefer for this recipe.
This is awesome to make and pack to have with you around town in a bottle, or just have for breakfast anytime.
Adding cocoa powder to the basic French toast egg mixture turns the classic French toast into something chocolatey and delicious.
Simple banana bars made with brown sugar, peanut butter, rolled oats, and wheat germ are an easy way to start your day or take breakfast with you.
This baked oatmeal recipe includes plenty of oats, roasted cinnamon, and maple syrup for a sweet and heavenly breakfast.
Quinoa, eggs, avocado, and feta cheese are layered together in this quick and easy avocado breakfast bowl.
Impress your family and friends with this overnight blueberry French toast casserole with a sweet cream cheese filling.
Bananas make this milkshake delicious and nutritious. It is yummy. A kid's favorite.
A dense spinach quiche that's good for breakfast, lunch, or dinner!
For this French toast casserole, you layer the syrup, bread and milk-egg batter in a baking dish the night before.  In the morning, just bake and serve for a time-saving breakfast everyone can enjoy.
A hearty breakfast dish that includes hashbrowns, cheese, ham and diced green chilies rolled into flour tortillas. A new favorite for your next brunch or office get together that can be made in advance and reheated easily the next day.
Super spicy French toast is served up with lots of butter and confectioners' sugar. This recipe comes from my brother's kitchen in New Mexico, he is a great cook.
Custard type pancake served warm with maple syrup that is sure to become a family favorite - our family has been enjoying this for many years.
Ringing the breakfast bell has never been easier! Enjoy all the traditional tastes of breakfast in one easy bake.
Fried chicken tenders, bacon, Cheddar cheese, and a sweet and spicy mayo are sandwiched between two waffles.
You'll never buy frozen breakfast burritos again! Loaded with sausage, eggs, and cheese, you can squeeze in a great meal even on your busiest morning.
The simplest, quickest form of cornbread was the kind that grandmas always made in a cast-iron skillet in a hot oven. Here's a vintage recipe for hearty, pioneer-style cornbread that takes only 5 ingredients. 
The cream cheese gives this delightful banana nut bread an added bit of moisture.
Ham, egg, potato, and asparagus are baked together in this Italian-style egg dish.
Prepare overnight oatmeal for Christmas morning by taking advantage of your slow cooker. Mix old-fashioned rolled oats with apple and cranberry juices, nutmeg, cinnamon, brown sugar, sliced apples, and dried cranberries to make a special holiday breakfast.
Flaked coconut adds chewy sweetness to spicy pumpkin-nut bread.
This is a moist, dense date bread with your choice of nuts -walnuts or pecans, almonds or hazelnuts.
Succulent raisins and chewy walnuts enhance this cinnamon-scented zucchini bread.
A sweet drink made of milk, honey and vanilla! Serve hot!
A scrambled egg with a little pesto stirred in. Sounds good... IS good. Try it on a slice of toast.
It's easy to make this crustless spinach and mushroom quiche - most ingredients are mixed in a blender. Stir, pour, and bake.
This recipe for almond flour pancakes is not only gluten-free and paleo-friendly, but it's delicious to boot! Top with maple syrup and fresh fruit.
This easy, foolproof recipe can be customized to your taste. Add dried fruit, nuts, or chocolate to make these bars your own.
A little roasted tomato salsa is the secret ingredient in this recipe for Chef John's corned beef hash.
Chef John's Mancakes--sweet-and-savory cornmeal pancakes made with bacon, cheese, and green onions--are perfect for big appetites and special breakfasts.
Breakfast sausage, jalapenos, onion, and creamed corn are layered with cheese and topped with cornbread in this easy casserole.
This is a nice change from ordinary quiche. Full of ham, wild rice, mushrooms, red bell peppers, and flavored with a touch of Dijon mustard, this quiche is fabulous for breakfast, lunch, or dinner. And the meat & veggie mixture is terrific simply scrambled with eggs for a quickie meal!
Russet potatoes are fried in bacon grease with onions and garlic pepper.
French toast and bananas are a perfect pair. This recipe sounds more difficult than it is. Give it a try, you'll love it! Try garnishing the toast with strawberries, powdered sugar and maple syrup.
A lovely mix that can be placed in a jar to give as a gift.  A great change from cookies in a jar. Just copy the recipe onto a card and attach it to your jar to give as a gift.
This is a great smoothie consisting of strawberries, banana, peaches, fruit juice and ice. Feel free to substitute or add any of your favorite fruits or juices.
The perfect brunch treat, small pastry shells are made from prepared pie crust and filled with bacon or ham, shredded cheddar cheese, and egg. Then they are topped with a bit of milk, nutmeg and pepper. The tarts are baked until the eggs are soft cooked.
Chopped, hard-cooked egg and white sauce are served over toast in this family breakfast tradition.
Thin layered blini with melted butter.. a true Royal Russian breakfast! Best eaten with sour cream, jams and honey.
A heaping helping of everything in a hearty quiche for real men. Not for those on a diet, but guaranteed to satisfy.
Chef John cooks and cools russet potatoes to make home fries with a perfectly crispy exterior and tender interior--just like your favorite diner!
A yummy breakfast casserole with potatoes, bacon, egg, and Cheddar cheese that's quick to throw together and great for guests.
Bake your bacon slices with a little brown sugar and cinnamon for a sweet change of pace!
These simple pancakes contain neither eggs nor dairy, and taste great with your favorite syrup! Be sure to use vegan chocolate chips.
Gosh these sound healthy and good. Soy milk is mixed in with whole wheat flour and cornmeal to make this wonderful batter. Pour onto a hot griddle or pan and cook each side until golden. Douse with maple syrup or the blackberry syrup above.
Coffee cans make excellent baking tins for breads, as proven here with one-pound cans substituting for conventional bread pans.  Well-spiced with cinnamon, nutmeg and allspice, the three medium loaves from this recipe are milder in pumpkin flavor than ot
Ham and cheese, fried potatoes, and an herb-seasoned omelet--all tucked inside a golden puff pastry crust. This is a special dish that's bound to impress your guests.
Homemade crepes spread with semisweet chocolate, filled with strawberries and finished with whipped topping in this easy dessert.
My sister taught me how to make these. They are the best pancakes in the world. Enjoy! You may also add fruit to the pancake batter before grilling the pancakes.
These big oatmeal breakfast cookies have the flavors of maple syrup and bacon.
This German-style, oven-baked pancake is accented with the flavors of vanilla and cinnamon.
This crunchy  peanut butter and chocolate granola is great for breakfast, or any time that a chocolate craving hits.
Ingredients such as wheat germ, flaxseed, protein powder, peanut butter and oats make these breakfast bars a healthy and tasty way to start the day.
Crispy potatoes make a delicious crust for this cheesy sausage and egg breakfast pie.
A luscious egg pie with crabmeat, red pepper and Swiss cheese, and a hint of white wine. Serve for a delicious and elegant luncheon!
This savory quiche features sausage and mushrooms.
Boiled eggs wrapped with a seasoned sausage meat.  A meal that goes over great at a party or with a salad for a light dinner.
French toast cooked in a waffle iron creates the best of both worlds in this breakfast mashup of everyone's two favorite sweet starts to the day.
Mashed potatoes, cabbage, carrot and cheese are made into convenient patties and fried. My father in law is from Scotland and this is a favorite family dish.
Blueberries, cream cheese, and bread bake in a creamy custard to create the best breakfast ever!
This smoothie will leave you feeling refreshed and give you that little extra boost you need to get you through the day. It also tastes great!
This is a no-fuss, easy recipe. The sauce is simply put together in a blender - no double boiling necessary. Assemble eggs with sauce over hot buttered English muffins with Canadian bacon, or if you prefer, Serrano ham. Yum!
A delicious non-sweet breakfast muffin alternative featuring the classic combination of bacon and corn.
Delicious for brunch or a quick week-night dinner, this frittata with sausage, potatoes, and Parmesan cheese is topped with chopped tomato and sliced green onion.
A nice eggy bread casserole with canned pumpkin and spices gets mixed up the night before, then is baked the next day to clear your kitchen and your morning for other things.
These pancakes were a regular feature on Sunday mornings when I was growing up. They're still the best I've ever had. Buttermilk pancakes with oatmeal and blueberries.
For your next holiday breakfast try these delectable pancakes, opulent with egg yolks and sour cream and lightened with fluffy egg whites. Serve with your favorite fruit preserves, apple sauce or a dusting of cinnamon sugar.
Easily adaptable into a Monte Cristo by just adding chicken, this wonderful battered then fried sandwich makes a great lunch with a tossed salad.
This creamy treat has protein and no added sugar for a yummy breakfast or dessert!
Coconut, rum and lime in banana bread?  Ya man!  This is a delicious and exotic twist on the common, bland banana bread.  So good you will never bake another run-of-the-mill banana bread! Serve this and watch the happy faces!
This is the perfect Fall or Winter brunch treat. Bacon, Gruyere cheese, broccoli and plum tomatoes are layered into a pastry shell, covered with a savory egg-cream mixture, and baked for an hour until perfectly set and delicious. Makes two 9-inch quiches.
This shake with instant breakfast mix, peanut butter, bananas, and milk, is great for a morning breakfast, or a snack anytime during the day.
This recipe makes two tasty breakfast pizzas topped with sausage, bacon and vegetables. Perfect for a party brunch.
A zesty overnight French toast. Orange juice and grated orange zest give it a double dose of citrus. Serve with syrup, butter and fresh fruit.
Satisfy your chocolate cravings with a moist whole wheat chocolate bread that uses very little oil.
Green chile peppers lend a flavor boost to this version of an egg breakfast casserole, also featuring cottage and Monterey Jack cheeses.
This recipe yields two loaves of dense bread with a nice crumb. It 's terrific toasted and slathered with butter and honey.
A delicious Pacific Northwest recipe made with smoked salmon and cream cheese. Garnish with fresh herbs or avocado slices for a beautiful presentation.
These are the traditional scrambled eggs that everyone loves. It's a great and easy recipe anyone could learn!
A delightful blend of orange and banana - filling enough to have as a breakfast!
A rich eggy dough is twisted into pretty flowers, then filled with jam and drizzled with lemon glaze for an Easter bread that will become a new tradition at your house. Pull it apart into petals to serve. Be sure to look at the pictures for how it is formed.
These delicious pancakes that taste like banana nut bread are easy to make and will disappear off the breakfast table on Sunday mornings.
Banana nut bread is simplified by using yellow cake mix and vanilla instant pudding.
Grains, fruit, honey, and spices--the perfect way to start the day!
These pikelets are thick and fluffy. With your choice of jam and whipped cream they become out of this world!
This creamy oatmeal is perfect for those cozy winter mornings with a good cup of coffee.  Or serve it to your kids with some hot chocolate.  Not too sweet, not too bland, and it has fresh fruit!
Scotch Eggs are part of the traditional Scots breakfast. They are also sufficiently versatile to be served hot with gravy at teatime, or cold as a snack.
This rendition of the popular, sweet Friendship Bread includes lemon pudding mix, applesauce and poppy seeds.
It's a fried egg sandwich on steroids!  This sandwich has explosive layers of egg, cheese, and ham. Make this with your favorite meat and cheese, any combination will work. The Eggy Doodle makes a perfect snack or fast meal! Add more than one kind of meat and salsa for a MEGA sandwich.
This is a crustless quiche that looks and tastes great.  Red Swiss chard makes the quiche very attractive.  It would also be good with half the salmon and twice the chard for a different flavor emphasis.
This is a super fast and simple to make granola  that comes out tender, crisp and delicious every time!  It's very versatile, simply add your favorite dried fruits, nuts, toasted coconut, etc.  If you prefer your granola harder, just cook it a little longer at the end. Using butter will give it a deeper/heavier flavor, oil gives it a lighter flavor, more like the commercial granolas you find at your grocery store.
Ham, cheese, and a fried egg are sandwiched between two buttermilk pancakes and covered with syrup. A great way to use up leftover pancakes!
Pumpkin pancakes are fun to make and fun to eat when decorated with spooky jack-o-lantern faces.
Chef John's recipe for summery scrambled eggs features cherry tomatoes, feta cheese, and plenty of fresh basil.
The easiest breakfast to make ahead, these savory 'bars' are packed with enough hash browns, eggs, ham, and Cheddar-Jack cheese to power your morning.
Chef John's cheese blintzes, filled with a lemon ricotta-cream cheese mixture, are perfect for a special brunch. Try them with a fresh berry sauce.
Chef John's delicious breakfast casserole is made with custard-soaked bread cubes layered with bacon, shredded Cheddar cheese, and fresh spinach.
Challah bread soaked in a cinnamon egg batter is baked atop a layer of syrup for a sweet, upside-down version of French toast casserole perfect for holiday mornings.
Sometimes coffee is a dessert in itself.  This is one of my favorite morning treats to make a Monday seem less intimidating.  You'll need a battery-powered milk frother or it's just not the same.
This flaky cheese crust is a great base for any savory quiche filling.
A big bowl of granola is a great way to start your day.  In this crunchy version, sweetened rolled oats and nuts are  mixed with pumpkin pie spice, baked until crispy, and tossed with dried fruit.
Spinach and spaghetti squash, with evaporated skim milk and light mozzarella cheese, make this quiche a little lighter on the hips than most without sacrificing flavor. Try using any of your favorite vegetables, or serve with a side salad for a complete meal.
I created this one Sunday morning when I was craving that Autumn flavor. These sensuous pancakes have all the beautiful flavors of autumn but only use what you probably already have in your pantry!
These waffles are so light and fluffy you'll just want to eat them right out of the waffle iron.  Great with ice cream for a fancy dessert or treat your kids to a family style breakfast with syrup and orange juice.
This wonderfully flavorful banana bread is a real crowd pleaser!  It's sweetened with molasses instead of sugar. What a nice variation!
A breakfast bread made in a bread machine with cranberries and walnuts.
My sister gave me this recipe.  It is so decadently rich and wonderful and especially nice toasted and spread with a little salty butter, or even cream cheese.
Yummy and delicious. These extraordinary waffles are flavored with molasses and spices. Topped with homemade chocolate sauce, they are perfect for a special breakfast treat.
These squares combine the taste of pancakes with the texture of pound cake.  Serve with maple syrup, honey, or jam.
This hearty and flavorful casserole is made with sausage, bacon, eggs, bread slices, and two kinds of cheese.
 This is a great recipe for leftover mashed potatoes and so easy. Just add egg, onion and seasoning and cook thick patties in a frying pan until brown and crusty on both sides. Good with chunky applesauce on the side.
This is an easy and filling supper dish, good with cooked greens or a tossed salad and some sprouted grain bread. Almost any vegetables can go into the mix; just make sure they're all cut up before you begin, and add the longest cooking ones first.
A big oven-baked omelet stuffed with bacon, cheese, tomatoes, olives and mushrooms. Great for dinner or brunch.
This sweet, cardamom flavored braid is sprinkled with pearl sugar just before baking.  My family is Swedish, and ever year we make this recipe just in time for Christmas. We always enjoy it especially on Christmas morning.
Banana pancakes topped with homemade coconut syrup is a tropical and crowd-pleasing way to begin the day.
Homemade granola, with toasted almonds, coconut, and oats, is perfect for sprinkling on yogurt or just snacking on by the handful.
Tomato and bacon egg muffins are a great on-the-go breakfast that will keep you full until lunch.
Use bacon strips to form the outer edge of these egg muffins easily adaptable to whatever omelette fillings you like.
This spinach and kale smoothie gives you an extra boost of energy thanks to peanut butter and chia seeds added to the mix.
A cinnamon-brown sugar filling is swirled over a pancake and topped with icing in this clever cinnamon roll pancake recipe the kids will love.
Who says waffle irons are just for waffles? Try making perfectly crunchy hash browns in the waffle maker for your next weekend breakfast.
Transform leftover pizza into a breakfast casserole with the help of eggs, mozzarella cheese, and oregano for a filling main dish.
Soak your oats with milk, brown sugar, pecans, and coconut before bedtime for a ready-made breakfast the next morning.
Surprise your brunch guests with this Italian-inspired quiche chock full of fresh mozzarella, tomatoes, and basil.
A banana is blended with strawberries, milk and yogurt. A delicious way to start the day!
Serve with toast and fresh fruit and you have a first-class brunch meal.
Ground ginger and cloves make the flavor difference in this raisin-studded bread.
This simple oatmeal and cinnamon quick bread is the perfect muffin alternative.
This is a simple quiche recipe for which you probably already have everything you'll need!  Biscuit mix and eggs are the key, along with zucchini, of course!
Rich and spicy, this bread is wonderfully laced with cinnamon, cardamom, allspice, cloves and fresh ginger. Chopped dates and dark beer add even more complexity. The recipe makes two loaves.
Cheddar and Monterey Jack cheeses are layered between slices of buttered bread and baked in a savory custard in this make-ahead breakfast casserole.
Bacon, eggs, and potatoes are cooked together over the campfire for a hearty start to your morning!  This is the one recipe we always cook when camping, it's easy and very filling.
Stupendous, rich, creamy and refreshing is what a traditional Filipino avocado milkshake is all about.
This delicate dish is loaded with ham, cheese and bread cubes in an egg mixture is perfect for brunch or supper. Goes great with some fresh fruit and blueberry muffins! Another plus is you make it day ahead, so you have more time out of the kitchen!
I got this recipe from an Amish woman in my area.  These are the best homemade hash browns!
A delicious and beautiful beginning to your day. Yogurt, granola and fruit are layered in a parfait glass. Use your favorite fruit, or whatever is in season.
Feta cheese adds a little zest to the standard breakfast. Not much salt is needed; feta is very salty.
Once you have some sweet Friendship Bread starter, you can make this fruity variation with apples or bananas, raisins and pecans.
A cornmeal and milk batter gives texture to these pancakes.  Serve with butter and honey, or with maple syrup.
This recipe for cinnamon-and-sugary pull-apart bread delivers a quick, yummy treat the kids will love.
Make this seasoned ground beef mixture the night before, then cook up delicious sausage patties for breakfast.
Hash brown potatoes, Canadian bacon, cheese, and eggs are layered and baked into a delicious breakfast casserole that helps start the day off right.
Wondering what to eat for your on-the-go breakfast? Make this healthy and delicious blueberry breakfast smoothie.
Eggs Benedict with a twist! A delicate yogurt and lemon sauce perfectly compliments savory smoked salmon.
Delicious curried egg salad sandwiches guaranteed to fill you up.
This recipe uses rice and tapioca flour instead of wheat and it still tastes yummy!
This balanced smoothie is great for a meal replacement or after a workout.
These are delicious alternatives to cold cereal, and kids love them.  Barley cereal works just as well.  Don't omit the orange peel!
Tender pink shrimp team up with savory kielbasa sausage and polenta in an easy version of shrimp and grits that makes a great main dish for a fancy brunch.
This is a delicious, cleansing juice uses lemons, beets, carrots, and apples. It is a great way to kick start your day, while getting necessary vitamins.
A simple and healthy breakfast quiche with leeks, kale, and cherry tomatoes is seasoned with fresh rosemary.
A quick bread would make a handsome addition to any holiday dessert table. It is almost like a banana bread, but uses pumpkin puree instead.
Bake oats, flax seed meal, and mashed bananas together to create a hearty, breakfast brownie perfect for all your family members.
This moist and sweet banana bread gets an extra zing from raspberries. Serve it at brunch for a sweet treat or as a snack with your coffee.
Sweet, spicy apple chunks, sausage, and Cheddar cheese add loads of flavor to this egg and bread cube casserole that's perfect for brunch. 
A baked chicken and zucchini dish, made with cooked chicken breast meat and prepared crescent roll dough, is a tasty, easy meal when you have a lot of zucchini. Honey mustard adds a sweet zing.
This fluffy, sweet apple pancake makes a quick and easy breakfast. It's so good, you could even serve it with a scoop of vanilla ice cream for a delicious dessert.
Baked tortillas, packed with sausage, cheese and eggs. Swimming in a hearty sausage gravy.
This zingy Mexican-style brunch casserole will wake up your taste buds!
Applesauce and egg whites provide the moisture in this nutty zucchini-carrot spice bread.
Here is a great recipe for authentic German Sourdough Bread. This bread tastes almost exactly like the bread we buy back home in Bavaria, Germany. There, to this day, they bake their bread in a very old stone oven in the middle of a small village, once every 2 weeks. They bake a whole bunch at once, and then you can buy it and freeze extras until the next baking day. It's the best German bread I know!
Delicious, easy and quick!  Versatile recipe where you can use different flours and add in whatever you desire! Try using dried fruit or different types of nuts in place of the pecans.
This recipe has been passed down for years, and is tried and true to be a breakfast pleaser for the old and the young and everyone in between. You can not go wrong! As a Home Ec teacher, I have satisfied many a teacher and student belly with this scrumptious French Toast.
Breakfast casserole with bacon, Cheddar cheese, and potatoes will quickly become a favorite in your household on the weekends.
This loaded breakfast skillet with potatoes, bacon, onions, eggs, and Cheddar cheese makes a hearty and delicious breakfast or brunch dish.
A simple oatmeal porridge with mashed bananas and melted chocolate to make it extra special!
With the variety of gourmet smoked sausages on the market these days, I wanted a recipe that was hearty, but still allowed the wonderful flavor of the sausage to shine through.  With plenty of input from my father and my husband, this recipe was born.
Rice flour replaces wheat in this tasty pancake batter.
Here is a homemade dry pancake mix that can be used for many pancake recipes. It should be stored in the refrigerator in an airtight container. Combine 1 1/3 cup of dry mix with 3/4 cup water and 1 egg.
This is a quick and yummy recipe where the pancakes and sausage are all ready at the same time! Serve hot with butter and syrup.
Spinach, banana, and carrot provide a wealth of nutrients to this smoothie recipe for a quick breakfast option when adjusting to your back-to-school schedule!
This breakfast pizza, made with refrigerated biscuit dough, is topped with eggs, bacon, and Cheddar cheese.
A burst of citrus flavor, the scent of cinnamon, and a sweet crunchy topping combine to make a refreshing breakfast treat!
It's like eating dessert for breakfast! Even picky breakfast eaters will love this oatmeal packed with pineapple, applesauce, carrots, and raisins.
Made with frozen bread dough, these cinnamon rolls are super-easy to make and super-tasty without all the work.
Kale provides a nice green color to this tropical smoothie made with pineapple and banana for a quick and easy breakfast made with a NutriBullet(R) or blender.
Here's a tangy citrus delight.  It turns out a light orange color loaf with a delicate orange flavor.
Scrambled eggs with cheese, white wine and garlic powder.
This is a very easy recipe that has the added bonus of being lowfat!  It bakes into a round loaf.
If you already think oatmeal is good, this recipe makes it even better!  I eat this every morning! Yum!
A hearty vegetable and ham breakfast casserole made with broccoli, ham, Cheddar cheese and eggs.
This is a great, flavorful way to prepare grits. You can also use mild sausage and less or no hot sauce if you prefer not to have the extra spice.
The word farl originates from the Gaelic word fardel meaning four parts. These potato griddle breads can be made with leftover mashed potatoes too.  Serve hot with a little butter and salt, or fry them alongside soda bread as part of an Ulster Fry-up.
This decadent breakfast treat is great way to start the day. It's so delicious you'll wish you could eat it every morning.
Golden-brown fried potatoes made with bacon drippings and sweet Vidalia(R) onion. Leftovers keep well in the fridge for a microwave breakfast on the go. For an East Coast twist, add diced green pepper.
Eggs, milk and chopped green chilies combine for a quick and easy breakfast or breakfast-as-a-light-dinner casserole.
This is a wonderful sausage gravy and biscuit recipe my cousin serves for breakfast on special occasions.
This perky poached egg dish is known as Cilbir in Turkey.
This not-too-sweet raisin bread with a cinnamon accent is made without yeast, so you will not have to wait nearly so long to enjoy it.
A hearty but healthy breakfast or brunch omelet, filled with cheese, mushrooms, spinach, and peppers. Serve with a slice of whole grain toast and fruit.
Frozen hash brown potatoes, bacon, and eggs get a trio of cheeses to make an all-American breakfast casserole.
Start your day off right with these breakfast sandwiches!
Mom's zucchini bread, nicely spiced with cinnamon, cloves, and nutmeg, is a perfect way to start the day. They also make great food gifts.
Two classic quick bread recipes are combined into one: banana zucchini bread, that can be made into muffins or loaves.
Bacon and the Greek tastes of spinach and feta cheese combine in an easy recipe that's like a combination of a baked omelet and a quiche. It's great at any temperature and for any meal.
Combine ricotta cheese, milk, and pancake mix for fluffy pancakes that are a nice change from traditional pancakes and a great way to use ricotta cheese.
Silver dollar pancakes packed with little chunks of banana and a hint of peanut butter.
Eggs, breakfast sausage, milk, spinach, Cheddar cheese, and oregano are all you need to make this recipe for a delicious breakfast casserole.
Brioche French toast, pan-fried and then finished in the oven, is topped with browned butter and maple syrup in this decadent brunch dish.
Cheesy bacon-sausage-egg-hash brown skillet is a scrumptious, easy breakfast dish loaded with bacon, sausage, hash browns, cheese, and eggs!
These waffles are rich and tasty!
Quickly whip together a pancake batter with prepared muffin mix, flour, baking powder, egg, and milk.
First popular in Punjab, India, and originally sometimes flavored with ground cumin, today's  version of lassi is a sweet, frothy blend of yogurt, milk, and fruit served well chilled.
Corned beef, potatoes, tomatoes, onions, and tons of garlic make this Filipino family recipe an excellent quick and easy dish to serve over rice.
This recipe is delicious, quick and easy. It goes great with green beans, and is the perfect way to use left over mashed potatoes. Serve with green beans for a quick supper or eggs and toast for a hearty breakfast.
These buttermilk griddle cakes are light and fluffy, and go down so easy with butter and syrup.
Traditional banana bread becomes untraditional with the addition of sweet butterscotch morsels.
Stir leftover eggnog into your pancake batter for a fancy and rich breakfast treat during the holiday season.
Make luscious, creamy shrimp and grits for two with this quick Cajun-inspired recipe. It's perfect for a romantic breakfast.
The perfect combination of eggs, sausage, bread, and cheese. Tender, delicious, and the family likes it!
One of grandma's favorite recipes, these pancakes are made healthier by using less butter, egg whites instead of a whole egg, and nonfat milk. A perfect way to start the day!
These pumpkin pancakes are paleo-friendly and seasoned with cloves, ginger, and cinnamon.
A hearty recipe for a style of breakfast burrito found in every eatery, taco stand, and gas station around Santa Fe, made with the famous green chiles from Hatch, New Mexico.
Start your day off right with these super quick and easy paleo one-minute muffins made with almond and flax meal.
Pancake casserole made with baking mix, Cheddar cheese, bacon, and maple syrup is a family-pleasing breakfast for weekend mornings. Serve with maple syrup.
Mini chocolate chips turn your breakfast pancakes into a special treat.
This is a great egg-free version of the classic French crepe that can be used as as snack, lunch item, or dessert (this was developed from the vegan version).
This quiche has spinach, Swiss chard, onions, garlic, a slew of yummy spices, tofu, milk, parmesan and Cheddar cheese.  But no eggs!
Layered sandwiches featuring ham, turkey and Swiss cheese. These are dipped in egg and browned in a skillet.
Why settle for second best? You can enjoy the ultimate in breakfast elegance ... crepes! Serve with whipped cream and your favorite fruit, jelly or syrup.
A simple but delicious breakfast bake with bread slices, eggs, cheese and ham.
If you're low-carbing it, try my spinach omelet with tomato and feta filling. If you thaw the spinach and squeeze it dry the night before, this omelet is very doable even for speedy weekday breakfasts.
Pancakes and sausage are all baked into one dish in this recipe.
Tasty pork sausages cooked in a crispy Yorkshire pudding!! Serve with onion gravy.
Flour tortillas are filled with an egg, ham and green onion scramble to make an irresistible breakfast wrap.
Start your morning off right with this mind-blowing recipe for hot coffee with coconut oil and butter.
Use up what's in your fridge in this simple quiche with Mediterranean flavors. 
Red Velvet isn't just for dessert anymore.  These decadent pancakes are delicious with mascarpone spread and   some maple syrup.
Want to make a special breakfast? Chef John has tips for making poached eggs ahead of time--which is a great way to prepare eggs benedict.
Top buttermilk pancake batter with fruit and bake into a giant pancake on a baking sheet to make feeding a brunch crowd a lot easier.
These wheat-free and dairy-free pancakes are made with bananas, eggs, and oats for a quick and easy breakfast.
Chef John's version of Scotch eggs calls for soft-boiled eggs; when you bite into the egg you get an amazing contrast between molten yolk and crispy sausage shell.
Tender cheesy grits are served with cooked shrimp and bacon in a Carolina brunch classic.
Eggs, Cheddar cheese, sausage, mushrooms, and bread are baked into a crowd-pleasing, breakfast strata even your pickiest of eaters will be going back for seconds.
Tender, crisp-edged home fries start their lives as baked potatoes, either fresh-made or leftovers. That's the secret to their texture. 
Spicy fried potatoes and a classic egg scramble combine to make a hearty and zesty breakfast.
Using a few shortcuts--prepackaged pie crust and onion soup mix--this Gruyere and Parmesan quiche can be made with a minimum of effort.
Banana, strawberries, blueberries, and cherries with a touch of honey are my favorite ingredients for this smoothie.
This Crab Cake recipe is the true Crab Cake with no fillers and no heavy spices, all crab meat. This recipe has been in my family for generations.
Scrambled eggs are best when perfumed with minced onion. These eggs are a great way to start out your morning!  They are easy and fast to make!
This recipe I made because I wanted to use up some instant banana oatmeal I had.  I don't use syrup on it because of the sweetness from the oatmeal and brown sugar.
An easy, oh-so-good quiche that will dazzle your brunch crowd. Cooked shrimp combine with rich, nutty-flavored Gruyere cheese, sour cream, green onions, and eggs in a prebaked pie crust.
We love quiche in our house; however, my mother is allergic to onions, so we created a recipe that she can enjoy with us. This is great with a cup of broth on a rainy day.
This omelet is juicy with this cheese - everyone that tried it, loved it, and they never expected it to turn out this good.
Delicious browned apples are the secret to this simple and hearty oven pancake. Very good when served with warm maple syrup.
Tender banana bread is made with sour cream and buttermilk for richness. This recipe contains no nuts. Serve it warm with butter.
These waffles with bacon and brown sugar are perfect for those lazy weekend mornings when you have time to wake up late and still have time to cook breakfast! They are deliciously irresistible.
Impress your family during the holidays with a green chile egg casserole that will warm the house and have everyone coming back for seconds.
This egg dish made in a skillet is filled with spinach, ham, bell pepper, onion, and cheese for a delicious and quick brunch option.
This pumpkin bread recipe follows guidelines for the paleo diet and delivers a deliciously dense breakfast or snack bread.
Sausage, eggs, crescent rolls, and cheese snuggle down in a casserole, chill overnight, and bake in the morning in this recipe for Christmas breakfast pizza.
Finally, vegan waffles that everybody enjoys! Made with oats, soy milk, and agave nectar, these waffles are a delight in the morning.
A crust made from crescent roll dough contains favorite breakfast foods like eggs, sausage, and hash browns.
Sausage, eggs, and hash brown potatoes cook over a camp fire in a Dutch oven in this breakfast large enough to feed several mountain men.
A yummy mix of veggies and eggs, topped with cheese and hot sauce. You may also use Indian curry spice or garam masala instead of cayenne and omit the cheese if you like.
An elegant version of French toast with a luscious egg coating and cream cheese filling.
Frozen strawberries make it possible to enjoy this sweet, quick bread year-round.  A shot of cinnamon and a scattering of crunchy pecans round out the flavors.
A breakfast casserole with corned beef hash, egg noodles and cheese.
Slices of whole wheat bread line the quiche pan, followed by a layer of sauteed zucchini and tomatoes, and a sprinkling of oregano. Next? Cottage cheese, yogurt, eggs and Parmesan cheese. Top with more cheese and bake!
Packed with oats and two types of flour, these pancakes will go perfectly with your favorite syrup.
A surprising mix of flavors, this dish can be served as a breakfast or brunch. Originally received from my Japanese mother, I simplified both the recipe and the name. I believe the original name was 'Om Rice' but my family just calls it 'Home Rice'!
This delicious filling for crepes is a great, unique way to use up leftover chicken or turkey. Prepare a basic crepe recipe in advance. Crepes can be made and frozen up to several weeks ahead of time.
Rich and flavorful - this pie is made with sun-dried tomatoes, breakfast sausage, fresh herbs, heavy cream, and shallots in a premade pie crust. It is a perfect Sunday morning breakfast quiche.
Start your day with a wholesome breakfast of old-fashioned oatmeal seasoned with cinnamon, blueberries, and dried cranberries, sweetened with orange juice, and cooked in minutes in the microwave. Add optional ginger and turmeric for a flavorful twist.
Have a pot of warm oatmeal, made with dried fruit and almond milk, waiting for you when you awake in the morning thanks to this recipe and your slow cooker.
These wheat-free and gluten-free pancakes are only 2 ingredients, are paleo-friendly, and will be a winner with your kids!
The famous Monte Cristo and Croque Madame sandwiches marry to form Chef John's delicious union of hot honey ham and Havarti held between crispy custard-soaked French toast and topped with a poached egg.
Eggs, butter and cheese are quickly blended together in this easy stir-together egg dish for large groups.
This berry drink recipe makes an easy and satisfying breakfast-on-the-go and is equally wonderful served as a part of a sit down breakfast or brunch. Blend frozen blueberries and strawberries with juice, yogurt, and bananas to make this colorful and tasty drink.
This is my Wisconsin version of a classic Bloody Mary drink. On special occasions, garnish with skewered bite-size pieces of Wisconsin Cheddar, Monterey Jack, pepperoni, salami, green olives or cocktail shrimp on top.  Best when consumed before noon.
If you are tired of simple fried bacon, try this. Bacon is simmered in a spice blend, then cooked until crisp and coated with great flavor.
Cream cheese is blended with brown sugar and spices, spread onto thick slices of bread, and fried with a simple batter in this wonderful French toast recipe!
Not exactly a blintz, but who cares when it tastes as great and is as fun to make as this layered brunch dish? Blenty of blintzes, indeed!
This is a fantastic dish to serve for a Christmas Day breakfast or brunch.
Cinnamon and nutmeg spice up this loaf of apples, walnuts, raisins and oats.
These filled pancakes are served during Russia's Pancake Week (Maslenitsa) celebration before Lent begins. Traditionally they're filled with caviar, jam, sour cream, or mushroom filling.
This quick bread is spiked with mango, coconut, and walnuts.
Salami, mushrooms, tomatoes, and artichoke hearts are baked in this cheesy egg dish perfect for brunch or a light lunch.
Egg white omelette stuffed with spinach, tomato, and feta cheese is an easy and filling way to start the day.
Multigrain chia seed waffles made with oats and whole wheat flour are a hearty way to start the day.
Shrimp cooked with garlic and onion are served over garlic cheese grits. This is a dish for garlic lovers. Serve with garlic bread or your preference of bread.
Kikkoman Panko Bread Crumbs put the crunch into your French toast.
Your bread machine makes this raisin-cinnamon yeast bread an effortless accomplishment.
Vitamin C powder gives this bread tang and a nutrition boost, while ginger gives it some kick.
Quick and easy, this baked egg dish is perfect for brunches, picnics, parties, and other gatherings. Cheese, diced chile peppers, green onion, bacon, black beans, and corn are whisked into eggs and baked. You can cut the cooked casserole into small squares and serve with toothpicks and salsa for dipping.
Rich and yummy baked French toast with blueberries and cream cheese. Tastes great served with blueberry syrup.
Sweet and chewy banana bread with raisins and nuts.
Chopped fresh pears are spiced with ginger, cloves, and vanilla in this moist quick bread.
Oatmeal is cooked with berries, applesauce, and wheat germ. It's delicious!
This vegan pancake recipe is the best of the vegan lot. The secret that these pancakes are not soggy like the other vegans ones is that it uses custard powder. This ensures the pancakes are cakelike and taste and look exactly like non-vegan pancakes. Mix fruit into the batter if you like. Serve hot with syrup or jam.
Croissants are a clever addition to this cheesy bacon, spinach, and onion quiche that's a quick and easy savory option for brunch.
This chocolate banana peanut butter protein shake is quick and easy to prepare and will keep you full until your next meal.
This is a warm and satisfying way to start the day - a nice change from bacon and eggs when you are on a low-carb diet.  It may sound odd, but give it at try - it's actually yummy. This can also be made using maple extract.
Easy, healthy and delicious! This cold European breakfast cereal is made the day before and placed in the refrigerator overnight. A variety of fruit such as apples, peaches, dried fruit or fresh berries and nuts can be stirred in just before serving for more flavor.
Love gingerbread?  Why not have it for breakfast?  These pancakes combine the warm flavors of cocoa, ginger, cinnamon, cloves and hazelnuts.
A quick and easy egg scramble featuring ham, cheese and vegetables.
You could face anything after this hearty breakfast of eggs, mushrooms and tomatoes fried with bacon and butter. Slices of Irish soda bread are grilled in the skillet and served on the side.
Cranberries, apples and bananas make for a moist, flavorful quick bread. Great for breakfast or dessert!
Rolled oats are combined with applesauce, raisins and cinnamon to make this low-fat, nutritious loaf.
Old-fashioned rolled oats are cooked with vanilla almond milk and dried cherries for a family pleasing breakfast treat.
Ham, spinach, onions, eggs and cheese are the ingredients in this kid-pleasing quiche that feeds a crowd. 
A Spanish tortilla is an egg omelet full of potatoes and onion, started on the stove and finished in the oven. It makes a great light supper, and it's perfect for breakfast, brunch, lunch, or even cold.
Make 2 loaves of 100-percent whole wheat bread with this recipe that includes coconut oil, honey, and lots of different seeds for texture and flavor.
Prepared biscuit dough is made into small crusts containing chicken and vegetables in a creamy sauce and topped with Cheddar cheese for a fun take-along small meal or snack.
These mini quiches are a great party snacks. Filled with spicy chorizo, potatoes, and cheese, they can be garnished with garlic mayonnaise and fresh chives.
Eggs poached in a mildly spicy tomato sauce and served with pita bread are a popular Middle Eastern breakfast.
Layers of potatoes, bacon, Cheddar cheese, and eggs bake overnight in the slow cooker for an easy and delicious brunch casserole for holiday mornings.
This loaf features a strong pumpkin taste enhanced by brown sugar, with a lighter spice component that does not rely as much on cinnamon as other renditions of this popular bread.  The optional nuts and raisins can be included to suit individual tastes.
Orange juice and zest lend a delightfully citrus accent to this mildly spiced pumpkin-nut-date bread.
A complete breakfast that you can carry in your hand! Eggs, cheese, sausage and green onion are sandwiched in an English muffin.
This is a very loved recipe from my Italian heritage and childhood. Have a nice Italian loaf or French baguette on hand to soak up the delicious sauce.
Delicious mini quiches are perfect for a brunch buffet. The ingredients are easily adjusted to what you have on hand, and everyone is sure to love them.
This is so good! A very filling breakfast made with oats, dried fruit, yogurt and nuts.
Replace noodles with spaghetti squash and bake with bacon bits, eggs, and Parmesan cheese in this gluten-free, grain-free carbonara recipe.
A true French omelette, or omelet as we Americans call it, is just eggs and butter, no filling. The egg is folded for a soft, tender texture.
Good bread, great cheese, olive oil and fresh rosemary infuse the entire dish with great flavor.  Tossing the bread with olive oil before assembling the dish makes the top crunchy and very tasty - reminiscent of good, homemade croutons, which is exactly what it is.
An oatmeal breakfast that is more like a coffee cake. Its easy and my family just loves this! Its a one of our breakfast favorites.
Super healthy and really delicious, Sweet Potato Pancakes will keep the simple carbohydrates out of your breakfast!  Make sure you serve the pancakes before you reveal their ingredients.  These are such a treat that even kids will eat them! I keep them in my fridge so I only have to go to the effort once a week.
These pancakes are a healthy alternative to traditional recipes. Serve them warm with a homemade brown sugar syrup. For the apples, be sure to use a firm baking variety such as Cortland or Granny Smith.
This dish can be a comforting breakfast or a fast dinner food. Onions are sauteed with potatoes and eggs then served with crispy bacon on warm flour or corn tortillas or even on buttered toast.  Add your favorite salsa or for a zesty zip!
A little nutmeg in the batter heightens the sweet potato flavor, and finely chopped pecans give an interesting crunch.  These wonderful waffles will warm you up on a cold morning.
Though you still need to mix by hand, this recipe is intended for the bread machine. The lemon zest heightens the blueberry flavor.
Strawberries and raspberries are blended with milk and yogurt creating a probiotic-enhanced breakfast treat.
This banana nut bread recipe makes a very dense and rich bread that will have your brunch guests begging for the recipe.
Chef John's recipe for a simple Italian omelet filled with goat cheese and chives is the perfect way to start your day.
This oatmeal recipe for the microwave uses quick cooking oats, skim milk, flax seeds, walnuts, honey, and a banana.
Here's a recipe for nutty cinnamon quinoa with dates, apricots, toasted almonds, and honey that makes a great breakfast.
Make this anise-flavored eggy Easter bread in the traditional style of Italian bakeries in south Philadelphia. Formed into a twist, and sprinkled with colored nonpareils, it will be a new favorite.
Oats lend texture to these banana pancakes made with almond meal and whole wheat flour.
Make this tasty, rich egg and Canadian bacon casserole the night before and just pop it in the oven on Christmas morning. Let it cook while you open gifts and sip your rum-spiked coffee! A sprinkle of red and green peppers adds a festive dash of color.
Pan-fried asparagus is baked with eggs, cream, and Swiss cheese creating a rich and hearty quiche perfect for any brunch.
This simple and easy version of shrimp served over buttery cheese grits is ready in just a few minutes and will be a breakfast or brunch dish to remember. Cayenne pepper adds a Cajun-inspired hint of spice.
This non-traditional eggs Benedict foregoes the hollandaise in favor of a simple dill butter.
Pecans and brown sugar give a baked French toast casserole the Southern flavor of pralines and pecans. Make it up the night before and bake it the next morning for a special breakfast dish.
This is an easy recipe for banana pancakes calling for ingredients you probably already have. Kids love them!
Mini quiches filled with Cheddar and Swiss cheese, instant potatoes, and sausage for a hearty, on-the-go meal.
The molasses in the batter gives this version of the classic breakfast food a caramel coating that is quite delicious. This one also proves to be a great way to use up the left over Challah from Shabbat on a Saturday morning. 
Not just your average pancake. Kids, peanut butter lovers, and those looking for a flavorful oatmeal pancake variation will gobble these up!
These whole wheat waffles made with coconut oil are delicious and freeze well; a great way to start your day!
Follow Chef John's recipe for classic potato pancakes, and you will get perfectly crisp latkes every time.
Flourless banana pancakes are held together with eggs in this quick and easy recipe for pancakes that fits into the paleo diet too!
Your search for hard-to-find good potato pancakes is now over. These are good old homemade ones that are slightly sweet, and very very moist.
A breakfast smoothie with tropical fruit, yogurt and fresh strawberries.
Whole wheat flour and wheat germ add depth to the flavor of these pancakes sweetened with applesauce. This is a recipe passed down from my husband's family in Wales. We added some ingredients to make it a little more healthy for our kids. Add fruit if you like and top with real maple syrup... yummy!
A real tasty treat and smells great too! These waffles will impress your breakfast guests, and they are also more nutritious than regular waffles.
Thick slices of bread are stuffed with bananas and soaked in a rich batter in this excitingly different French toast recipe!
Fresh pineapple and coconut milk transform regular waffles into a remarkable tropical brunch extravaganza!
A sweet breakfast bread with raisins that tastes most excellent toasted.
Just pop these ham and egg cups in the oven for a fun and delicious breakfast of eggs, sauteed mushrooms, and onions held together by ham.
These low-carb pancakes made with only 4 ingredients - cream cheese, eggs, stevia, and cinnamon - are super quick and easy to make.
Here's my foolproof method for making hard-boiled eggs when we want softer, creamier yolks such as in salads.
The waffles you'll get from this recipe for healthy, protein-packed waffles are fluffy and delicious! Top 'em however you like your waffles topped!
This is a great way to cool down. Bananas and pineapple juice, sweetened to taste and then blended with ice until smooth.
This easy and delicious granola is better than store bought, and the cranberries add a sweet surprise.
Chuck wagon hash is a dish that is made up of ground beef, onions, rice, corn, cream of mushroom soup, beef broth, seasonings and topped off with Cheddar cheese.  It's an easy, inexpensive, hearty meal that will have your family begging for more.
Whip up this tangy-sweet smoothie in minutes using freshly squeezed red grapefruit juice, strawberries, bananas, yogurt, and honey for a refreshing drink.
An inspired breakfast treat! A jumble of my favorite foods (eggs, beans, cheese, salsa) make breakfast friendly!
A tender and delicious breakfast souffle with honey and cream cheese.
A potato and 6 eggs are fried in olive oil to make this simple frittata. Cut it into rectangles or wedges and serve between 2 slices of Italian bread either by itself or with tomato slices. Delicious!
Impress the whole family on weekend mornings (or any evening!) with a rich Tater Tots casserole loaded with eggs, sausage, and sharp Cheddar cheese.
Cottage cheese is the secret ingredient in these thin and delicate pancakes. Sprinkle with blueberries for extra color and flavor.
An easy, layered dish that refrigerates overnight so you have more time to spend with your guests in the morning!  This recipe makes a lot, so it's great for a crowd.
Combine and refrigerate oats, fruit, walnuts, almonds, and yogurt together ahead of time for a quick and easy breakfast muesli on the go!
Zucchini, eggs, Cheddar cheese, and a frozen pie crust are all you need to make this satisfying brunch dish.
Store-bought pie crust makes this versatile quiche a snap to put together. Ham, bacon, or shrimp would work well in place of the chicken.
Prosciutto and asparagus pair deliciously with poached eggs and a sprinkling of lemon.
Whole wheat pastry flour and oat flour give these easy waffles their light, crisp texture and nutty flavor.
Using a pineapple-coconut drink mix is an easy way to give your french toast a Caribbean flavor.
This French toast is a great way to celebrate winter. The orange flavor stimulates the senses and adds comfort and warmth after a great morning of skiing. Serve with freshly squeezed or high calcium orange juice to get that extra boost, and top with pure maple syrup or a sprinkle of icing sugar.
Plenty of milk is the secret to these fluffy scrambled eggs.
The perfect homemade waffles are quick and easy to make using this simple recipe.
Homemade buttermilk biscuits with flecks of bacon are easy to prepare using 5 simple ingredients creating a tender and buttery treat.
A quick and easy egg dish with Southwestern flair. Serve with picante sauce if desired.
An unusual layered brunch sandwich, old family weekend favorite.  A delicious flavor combination of bacon, cheese and pineapple. You'll see why they call Hawaii the Sandwich Islands!
Strawberries, bananas, peaches, and apples blended with vanilla ice cream for a delightful fruit smoothie.
My mother always makes this excellent egg and mushroom breakfast casserole for Christmas brunch.  It's wonderful.
Sauteed onions, crispy bacon, and a blend of cheddar and American cheeses provide the filling for this fluffy omelet.
This is for all fellow coffee drinkers. I love lattes but buying them can be pricey. So here's a recipe so you can make your own.
Smoked sausage with cheese, roasted potatoes and scrambled eggs blend beautifully for breakfast, brunch or dinner. This quick and easy meal is sure to get the guys out of the garage
Tomatoes and sausage are baked in cheesy layers then served with a home made basil mayonnaise. Delicious and very easy.....great for a brunch or showers.
A banana, avocado, and spinach smoothie is a quick and easy breakfast or snack that is perfect for on-the-go meals.
Cornbread mix, bacon, pepperjack cheese, and green chile peppers are cooked in the waffle iron producing a savory waffle perfect for brunch!
These crowd-pleasing sourdough waffles are crisp on the outside and thick and soft on the inside, great for camp-outs or large breakfasts.
Chorizo, eggs, and corn tortillas are all that you need for this quick and easy chorizo con huevos recipe that's ready to eat in 15 minutes.
Almond milk and almond butter are the star ingredients in this berry smoothie for a nutritious, on-the-go meal that is vegan and paleo-friendly.
Refrigerated crescent dough makes a quick and tasty crust for this cheese, spinach, and red pepper filled quiche.
Norwegian Klub is a dish my mother made when we were growing up. I like to have it topped with bacon grease and my wife likes them brushed with butter and sprinkled with sugar. Sliced and fried the next day these are a hearty breakfast meal
Potato pancakes with garlic, carrot, onion, dill, and parsley pan fried until golden brown.
These are your basic fried potatoes - with a few extras! Total time depends on your own speed to peel and slice potatoes and such, and how crispy you like them. My mom always calls them 'Garbage Potatoes' because you just throw in a bunch of junk. If you don't like peppers, don't use them - throw in something else that you like.
Even if you don't think you have time for breakfast, my Chocolate-Cherry-Banana Smoothie can be blended in just a few minutes. Pour it into a travel mug and enjoy it as you commute.
It wouldn't be Christmas without one (or several!). If you have a home espresso machine, this is a great holiday coffee treat.
Add a little orange juice and orange zest to classic blueberry bread for a wonderful variation.
I think this must be the original quiche - the old standby from which all others derived. This is a really delicious dish.
Cherries and banana are given a shot of almond extract in this tasty smoothie.
If you can't decide between pumpkin bread and zucchini bread, make this recipe and have both at the same time. Recipe yields 2 pans.
Perfect for breakfast, this vegetarian quiche also makes a great lunch or light dinner when served with a salad.
Spinach, shiitake mushrooms, broccoli, and sharp Cheddar cheese lend their flavors to a savory egg quiche that's ready in about an hour. A little bit of turkey bacon adds a smoky taste.
Very quick, easy, and tasty french toast spiked with cinnamon.
A flavorful savory muffin of chard, zucchini, and bacon is baked for a perfect golden crust. Serve as a main dish with a salad or as a side dish at brunch.
These red pancakes drizzled with a frosting-like glaze will make any breakfast special.
Crumbled chorizo sausage, spinach, cherry tomatoes, and cheese add heat, flavor, and color to this delicious frittata.
This substantial casserole of eggs, cheese, onion, spinach, sausage and Sister Schubert's Whole Wheat Yeast Dinner Rolls can be assembled the night before and baked the next morning.
This big brunch recipe delivers a big pan of cheesy scrambled eggs with plenty of hot sauce and seasoned salt for flavor.
This recipe for paleo coconut flour pancakes is sure to become a breakfast favorite.
Flourless banana pancakes made with eggs are cooked in coconut oil for a quick and easy gluten-free and paleo breakfast.
Wake up to this mixture of eggs, sausage, hash brown potatoes, and Cheddar cheese that cooks while you sleep using your slow cooker.
This crustless onion and cheese quiche is a delightful main dish perfect with a green salad.
This simple quick bread contains buttermilk and nuts. People love it and often ask for the recipe.
This sweet, smooth honey-oat quick bread gets its pizzazz from crunchy nuts and tart cranberries.
Buttery Yukon Gold potatoes, diced ham, and onions are cooked in olive oil until golden brown. Add a dollop of sour cream over the top and enjoy!
Nothing beats the smell of freshly baked waffles on a cold wintery day.
Sugar and spice makes bacon very nice! Three ingredients lend a different twist to start your morning right.
One taste of this great Mexican breakfast dish made with crisp corn tortillas, eggs, and chile peppers, and you'll be hooked!
Cinnamon in the batter adds an unexpected and delightful flavor twist to these easy fluffy pancakes that'll become a morning favorite.
A wonderful breakfast treat made with almonds, raisins, and dried cherries that's way better than anything you can buy in a box! Use the baking nuts that aren't salted or roasted.
Start your day with delicious scrambled egg and avocado burritos!
A yummy breakfast in one dish. Hash browns are combined with eggs, bacon and cheese in a grilled sandwich. You can always substitute sausage or ham for the bacon.
The best, creamiest scrambled eggs are flavored with curry and Cheddar cheese.  Try these once and you'll be hooked!
This simple, elegant and flavorful chicken salad features tender chicken nestled in a dressing of homemade mayonnaise studded with red grapes, pecans and blue cheese.
Stuffed bread filled with pork sausage, green peppers, mushrooms, and mozzarella cheese. 
This simple dish can be made the night before and then popped in the oven for brunch. It's packed with cheese goodness and topped with a crunchy cornflake crust.
Use your slow cooker to have a big pot full of steel cut oats with bananas and blueberries ready for you when you awake in the morning.
Autumn is pumpkin-spice season, and waffles are a great medium for the seasonal craze when you have cinnamon, ginger, and cloves in your batter.
Chef John's recipe for bacon and potato frittata includes Swiss chard and Parmesan cheese, and is the perfect at breakfast, brunch, lunch, or even dinner.
This praline pecan French toast casserole is a decadent way to enjoy a special brunch. Start it the night before and bake it the next morning.
Make a batch of these oatmeal chocolate chip breakfast cookies for a quick on-the-go breakfast or snack.
Peanut butter flavored oatmeal is fortified with egg whites and ground flax seed.
Gluten free cheesy egg bake? Try our tasty version thanks to Bisquick(R) Gluten Free mix.
Get all of the goodness of a cinnamon roll in your breakfast waffles with this recipe that the whole family will enjoy.
Paleo-friendly pancakes made with almond flour, banana, and almond butter are a hearty and family-pleasing breakfast.
A recipe for delicate English muffin bread that's baked in your microwave! You might also try adding about 1 teaspoon of cinnamon and 1/2 cup of raisins to a batch.
Cooked ham, chicken, or bacon, shredded cheese, and cooked zucchini are layered in a pie plate and covered with a biscuit mix-custard mixture and baked. This dish can be served hot or cold, and can be frozen, too.
Pita bread sandwiches with scrambled eggs and potatoes. Very quick. I sometimes make it for myself when I'm rushed. This recipe is great for using up leftovers, and is very versatile: you can add any other seasonings you like, and you can use egg substitute if you prefer.
Refrigerated biscuit dough makes this delicious pull-apart bread easy to make.
This creamy but creamless raspberry-orange-banana juice makes a smooth and colorful start to the day.
This quick, easy quiche is made with fresh zucchini, and is mixed entirely in a food processor.
A crunchy, nutty granola that never fails to get compliments from breakfast guests.
Seasoned sauteed vegetables are topped with eggs and cheese and baked. It's that simple, and it is delicious.
Fried eggs and tomatoes in a tomato sauce - a delightful brunch!
Shrimp, veggies and cheese are the perfect filings for a hearty omelet!
By using heavy duty aluminum foil and creating some valleys for the bacon fat to flow results in perfectly flat, perfectly crisp, yet still succulent strips of bacon. Perfect for a BLT!
A time-tested favorite ricotta pancake recipe, this is a little tangy and very satisfying; perfect with fresh blueberries or strawberries.
Here's a Mexican-inspired variation on the traditional corned beef breakfast hash. Chorizo, diced tomatoes, cilantro, and avocado add color and flavor to create a delicious one-pan meal.
A fast meal of eggs scrambled with tomatoes, and then seasoned with salt, sugar, and soy sauce. A great summertime recipe for using fresh tomatoes.
Warm French toast topped with a cream cheese frosting. This is a reduced-fat version of what my sister serves for breakfast whenever they have company.  It is incredible!
These orange-scented quickbreads are full of chopped nuts and cranberries. They keep well, and also make great gifts!
Cinnamon, apples, and pears are blended with spinach for a quick, on-the-go breakfast smoothie.
These tall, fluffy, and gluten-free pancakes use gluten-free flour and xanthan gum to make pancakes every bit as delicious as the original recipe.
This French toast in a cup is quick and easy to make and is great for breakfast, lunch, or a snack.
Sticky, sweet fresh figs are a delightful addition to the morning smoothie.
A ring of crescent roll dough is stuffed with a delicious combination of chicken, red bell pepper, spinach, and Cheddar cheese.
If you're looking for hearty, rib-sticking pancakes with the flavor of oatmeal, cinnamon, and whole wheat, these buttermilk pancakes will do the job.
With a nod to the famous 'bull shot' cocktail, this tasty bloody mary mix adds beef consomme for savory flavor. Drink it as is over ice or add vodka. Adjust the spices to your taste -- this version is spicy!
Enjoy the brief, sweet season of fresh nectarines with this delicious smoothie.
Cinnamon cream cheese is spread between slices of raisin bread, dipped in egg, and pan-fried to make an easy but special breakfast treat.
Frozen bread dough rises overnight with a sweet and sticky blend of butterscotch pudding mix, sugar, and cinnamon. Chopped pecans add a terrific crunch to this popular brunch bread.
Apple slices and pecans are layered between a sweet and buttery caramel sauce and fluffy bread slices in this kid-pleasing breakfast treat.
Milk, bananas, and a pinch of sweetener are all you need for this creamy, smooth drink.
These savory whole wheat cookies have bacon bits and Cheddar cheese and are sure to satisfy your sweet and salty cravings.
Blueberry oatmeal pancakes, made with ground oats instead of wheat flour, are a nice alternative if you are staying clear of wheat.
Coconut flour, coconut oil, and stevia sweetener make a different type of pancake for those watching their carbohydrate and sugar intake.
Serve for breakfast or a quick snack.
Make a week's worth of breakfasts good to grab and go with eggs, spinach, bell peppers, jalapeno peppers, and ham.
This sweet, cinnamon-laced loaf is packed with apples, nuts and cheddar.
A dense, moist loaf with buttermilk and sour cream, this bread also incorporates raisins and caraway seeds for heightened flavor.
Banana, nutmeg, vanilla milk and crushed ice blended into a smooth ride of a drink.
Two delicious and elegant savory tarts for that special brunch event.
This zesty egg and cheese scramble is served over a crisp tortilla, and tastes great with whatever toppings you want to try!
These banana pancakes have a delicious new twist! White chocolate chips give these pancakes an intense flavor rush spiced with cinnamon, ginger, and vanilla. Using a boxed pancake mix make these super easy to make, but so delicious people will be begging for the recipe!
A hybrid between an omelet and a sandwich, eggs mixed with cheese and folded around bacon, plus assorted meats and vegetables of your choice is served between toast to make a hearty breakfast or brunch main dish.
This is a simple appetizer that is great for breakfast or brunch we make them every year for Christmas morning brunch.
Bacon and Tater Tots are baked with eggs and veggies in these delicious egg cups, an easy breakfast to take on the run in the morning.
Eggs, sausage, cheese, and cream are refrigerated overnight and baked in the morning creating a keto-friendly oven breakfast or brunch.
Plenty of eggs and cream keep these pancakes fluffy, while almond and coconut flours keep the carb content low if you're on the keto diet.
Free of gluten and added sugars, these banana bread drop muffins are so scrumptious, you won't believe how easy Whole30(R) mornings can be.
These hearty country hot cakes are quick and easy, melt-in-your-mouth breakfast pancakes, thickened with Cream of Wheat(R) and buttermilk.
Banana, almond milk, and a touch of vanilla are blended together in this refreshing banana drink that is vegan and paleo-friendly.
This vegetable omelet is great at any time of the year, but it is best in the spring when asparagus and mushrooms are in season. Serve with toast or a bagel.
When deep fried, French toast is crispy and golden brown on the outside, chewy on the inside.
This is just a really good and hearty banana bread. If you're not a nut person just omit them, you can also add a few raisins if you'd like. I like it right after its made, drenched in whipped butter. It's so yummy.
The earthy quality of buckwheat combines well with sourdough in these flapjacks.  A whiff of ginger complements the hearty flavors.
One of my son's favorite breads.  You can ice top with a powdered sugar glaze if you wish.
This sweet quick bread needs only the unique taste of crunchy little poppy seeds to make you smile.
Shredded raw veggies--like onion, garlic and zucchini--are pressed into a rectangular pan, then sprinkled with Parmesan and toasted sesame seeds. No crust needed!
Vanilla yogurt and orange juice make a tasty base for this smoothie with raspberries and bananas.
Thanksgiving breakfast gets the royal treatment with this delicious recipe for quick and easy pumpkin pancakes that taste just like pumpkin pie!
An easy breakfast recipe of shredded hash brown potatoes, Egg Beaters(R), sausage, red bell pepper and Cheddar cheese baked together.
Moist banana bread has a little extra kick, thanks to ginger added to the batter, makes for a tasty way to start the day.
Frittatas are a hearty and satisfying egg dish that can be filled with almost anything. This one includes sweet and hot peppers, potatoes, and bacon.
This one-dish brunch casserole is ideal for a crowd. Add a fruit salad and you can sit back and enjoy your company.
This quick, fresh, and delicious juice is loaded with carrots and oranges, and is a great way to start off your day!
Use a food processor to combine ingredients for these crisp potato latkes.
Make your next brunch man-friendly with this taco-inspired quiche. With ground beef, salsa, and cheese, this easy egg pie is sure to be a hit.
Omuraisu is a Japanese-style omelet made with fried rice. In this version, an egg omelet is draped over ham fried rice flavored with ketchup.
Very ripe bananas add a wonderful sweetness to this family favorite. Add whatever nuts you have on hand to personalize this breakfast treat.
These fun breakfast banana wraps are so easy a kid can help make them. Whole wheat tortillas are spread with peanut butter and filled with a banana half, coconut, and crunchy granola cereal.
Sweet potato puree gives French toast a delicious flavor and color.
Sweet potato and banana are blended together with soy milk and cinnamon for a creamy and colorful smoothie.
Oats, chia seeds, and almond milk are mixed with a chai tea spices creating a nicely spiced overnight oatmeal for a quick breakfast.
Cinnamon raisin bread is baked in a buttery egg mixture creating a delightful raisin bread French toast casserole the whole family will love. Serve warm with maple syrup.
Thick slices of French toast hide a delightful mixture of sweetened and whipped cottage, ricotta and cream cheeses that are flavored with extracts to your preference.  Use challah or French bread for best results.
Cardamom makes an interesting variation on regular old banana bread, especially when it 's combined with whole wheat flour, raisins and rum.
These healthy pancakes with a hint of almond are delicious.  They're thick and fluffy and they really stick to your ribs. Serve warm with maple syrup or peach jam. Leftovers are great served cold with a little peach jam spread on them, yum!
A rich baked crepe that will puff in the oven and can be filled with just about anything.
Greek yogurt pancakes with Greek yogurt, eggs, flour, and baking soda are hot and ready to eat in 15 minutes.
These easy Irish soda bread muffins are flecked with caraway seeds and raisins.
Frittatas are easy to make using a cake pan that fits in the air fryer basket. Switch up the ingredients to suit your taste.
Perfect for a Mother's Day brunch, this frittata showcases fresh spring veggies, potatoes, and cheese. Cook the potatoes before you start.
Breakfast On-The-Go has never looked or tasted this good!  Great protein breakfast that will help fuel your busy day.
Baked oatmeal with a caramelized brown sugar top layer doesn't get any better than this--and it feeds a crowd.
Vanilla extract, orange juice and orange zest make these pancakes taste just like a Creamsicle(R).
King's(R) Hawaiian Rolls are topped with scrambled eggs, deli ham, and provolone cheese in this quick and easy slider recipe.
Ramen noodles and scrambled eggs come together in this quick and easy breakfast for busy mornings.
This smoothie is a favorite in my family and is quick and easy to make. You could also use a large can of yams in place of cooking the fresh ones.
This pizza is made with a combination of all your favorite breakfast foods, such as sausage, cheese, hash browns, and eggs. Top with thinly sliced red, yellow and green bell peppers for a beautiful (and tasty!) presentation.
Great tasting granola sweetened with honey. A very versatile recipe as your favorite nuts and dried fruit can easily be substituted for those listed.
Cubes of Spam are fried in a skillet with eggs, and topped with cheese.
This egg and vegetable brunch casserole features large lima beans, a California favorite!
Any type of sausage may be used in this tasty baked treat, but turkey sausage is a favorite. They'll be rising and shining in anticipation of this wonderful medley of flavors!
The reaction between the bananas and the buttermilk combined with the dual action baking powder makes these pancakes super fluffy. Huzzah for science!
Fresh blueberries and cream cheese are sandwiched between two slices of whole wheat bread and topped off with homemade orange maple syrup.
An Aeggekage is a traditional Danish oven pancake, usually served as a buffet item or as a dessert for a family holiday meal.  It is a light, cake-like dish that is not too sweet and absolutely delicious with fresh seasonal berries and fresh whipped cream! (Think of it as a sweetened Yorkshire pudding).
A delicious granola without the fat can be made with spelt, flax seeds, and pecans!
A sweet and savory mixture of ham, pineapple and cheese served on a warm croissant.
Pain Perdu is a special New Orleans-style French Toast. The most tender version is made with wide loaves of French or Italian bread. Its great flavor comes from the orange brandy in the batter.
A refreshing healthy smoothie with bananas, pineapple, milk and honey.
Bursting with flavor, these Mexican mini-quiches are easy to make and always a hit!
This pumpkin banana smoothie has a hint of cinnamon and brown sugar for a delicious on-the-go breakfast in the fall.
Smoked salmon quiche made with a layer of cream cheese and mozzarella cheese is a specialty brunch item for your family and friends.
Bananas and raisins get a boost from vanilla and cinnamon to replace sugar as the sweetener for oats in this steel-cut oatmeal recipe for the slow cooker.
Make sandwiches from chocolate-hazelnut spread and cinnamon bread and then turn them into French toast for a delicious breakfast treat.
These cottage cheese pancakes are sweetened with banana and brown sugar. Use a blender to get the batter done in a jiffy.
This cheesy hashbrown casserole made with cream of chicken soup is topped with a buttery cracker topping for a warm and comforting side dish.
Bainsville egg farmers Luc and Louise Secours enjoy this quiche-like 'pie' fresh out of the oven or warmed in the microwave the next day.
Savory potato pancakes with onion and cheese are easy to make, because you start with instant mashed potatoes and prepared pancake mix. Make up a big batch of dry mix ahead of time, and these take only a few minutes to get on the table.
This rich and eggy breakfast casserole is perfect for feeding a crowd. Serve it with a side of fruit for a little color and sweetness.
This easy breakfast casserole gives you the delicious Sunday morning flavors of smoked salmon, croissants, and eggs, all in one dish.
This flavorful strawberry and banana fusion is sweetened with honey and offers wheat germ as an optional ingredient.
An easy breakfast casserole, with sausage, hash browns, biscuits, and eggs that you can make with the kids to surprise Dad on Father's day.
Almond milk, cinnamon, and apples combine with red quinoa in this hearty start to your day.
Pesto and cheese-flavored scrambled eggs, brightened with cherry tomato slices and marinated artichoke hearts, are wrapped up in a flour tortilla with a slice of turkey bacon for a light, savory wrap that's perfect for breakfast or lunch.
Perfect for fall, these thick and flavorful pumpkin pancakes taste wonderful.  
Made with whole wheat flour, wheat germ, and skim milk these chocolate chip pancakes sound healthy but taste delicious.
This simple egg scramble idea features Parmesan cheese and tomatoes seasoned with black pepper and garlic salt.
Red-eye gravy is a traditional Southern gravy made with black coffee and pan drippings. Served over smoky, salty ham, it's a surprising flavor combination.
Quinoa is simmered in cinnamon and milk and topped with cashews, dried fruit, and fresh berries for a hearty start to the day.
Perfect for breakfast, lunch, or dinner, the crispy tortilla crust makes this tasty quiche a snap to prepare.
This tasty baked brunch dish has zucchini, onion, garlic, and plenty of Cheddar and Parmesan cheese.
Ham and eggs get dressed up with jalapeno pepper, Cheddar cheese, and apple-smoked ham in this hearty breakfast scramble.
Baked cinnamon apple French toast can be prepared the night before and baked in the morning for a sweet breakfast treat on holidays.
Banana bread topped with a salted caramel glaze is a sweet and savory twist on a traditional favorite. Serve warm!
Refrigerator oatmeal is prepared at night, refrigerated, and ready to eat in the morning for a portable breakfast. Add your favorite fruit or nuts!
This is a traditional French toast coated in corn flakes and deep-fried for a fun, crunchy breakfast.
This is a yummy recipe we made in my preschool class years ago and has been my favorite ever since.
Strawberry quick bread with cinnamon and walnuts.
One of my mom's favorites for buffets or brunches and afternoon lunches. Served with a nice salad, this is a nice light meal.
Make this apple-pumpkin-banana smoothie with yogurt for breakfast, or with ice cream for dessert-or for a sweet midnight snack!
Made in the bread machine, this banana bread is a yeast bread. No need to mash the bananas...the machine will mash them as it mixes the bread.
Give scrambled eggs some savory add-ins with this tasty combination from Down Under. Sauteed onions and bell pepper, mushrooms, and bacon are stirred into beaten eggs along with grated cheese and diced tomatoes.
This recipe is for enjoying the texture of eggs at the most tendermost but easiest level. It has the sweetest aroma I have ever tasted in eggs using the least ingredients.
This egg casserole studded with bell peppers, potatoes, and bacon is topped with melted Cheddar cheese for a hearty breakfast or brunch.
I'm seeing lots of savory, non-breakfast versions of Dutch Babies on menus lately, so I thought I'd try it with this amazing bacon and asparagus version. The best pan to use is a 12-inch cast iron skillet.
Make stacks of small, authentic Swedish pancakes with this family-friendly recipe that's ready in minutes and needs only 5 ingredients.
Oats, whole wheat flour, flax, chocolate chips, and almond butter come together to make these delicious 'clean' breakfast cookies your whole family will enjoy.
How do you improve on waffles? Use cinnamon roll dough as your waffle batter, of course, and top with cream cheese syrup for a perfect breakfast treat!
A delicious baked omelet using fresh apples! I double the apple for more flavor.
French toast topped with muenster cheese. I know it sounds weird, but you have to taste it!
Light, airy waffles - a real treat!
Throw this quick bread together in a few minutes, and have a warm slice of pumpkin pecan bread with chocolate chips in no time.
A quick, easy, and very delicious recipe that can be eaten for cold cereal, topping on yogurt or even for a snack. Because it does a better job than honey, I use part maltose syrup (purchased at Asian markets) to help bind the ingredients together instead of using all honey. Virgin coconut oil has many healthy properties and enhances the taste of the granola, but if that cannot be found you can substitute it with any other oil. Enjoy!
I came up with this recipe one night for dinner and my husband and family loved it and it has become a regular for us. The combination of spiced apples and brie cheese is amazing.  Great served with a spring lettuce salad.  You can also make this as an appetizer by using a baguette loaf instead of sourdough slices.
Sweet and nutty waffles to warm any winter morning.
A flour tortilla is topped with a tomato/egg/cheese filling and sour cream, rolled up, and the whole casserole-full is doused in an incredible tomatillo salsa and baked.
Banana walnut pancakes made with coconut oil and eggs are a paleo-friendly breakfast treat that kids and adults will love.
This gluten-free and grain-free banana bread gets an extra boost of protein and fiber thanks to the secret ingredient of chickpeas.
Slow cooker French toast made with cinnamon-raisin bread and bits of sweetened apples will make your whole family happy in the morning.
Not just for breakfast! Try it for supper too because you can make it up to 12 hours ahead of time.
Smoky bacon and sweet crab make this bread pudding a flavorful twist on a classic Eggs Benedict. Try this elegant dish for a special breakfast or brunch.
A cheesy blend of sausage and eggs are baked between layers of store-bought crescent roll dough in this make-ahead breakfast casserole.
Bacon is the beginning of a sweet, savory, and smoky spread that's just irresistible on a biscuit, with crusty bread, or added to scrambled eggs. The flavors of onion, maple syrup, and bourbon whiskey add complexity.
Add a little splash of color to your fried potatoes by stirring yellow squash into the mix. It is a great way to use up the extra summer crop!
Refrigerated biscuit dough pressed into muffin cups is filled with egg, bacon, and cheese for a bring-along meal.
An adventurous drink, glogg comes from an old word meaning burning ember. You'll feel the heat when you serve this Swedish mulled wine for the holidays!
These fried potato pancakes are best accompanied by beer. You can adjust the seasonings and add other ingredients to your liking.
This delicious breakfast is inspired by English beans on toast, but with an Italian twist.
This pancake recipe uses applesauce instead of egg and rice instead of wheat.
A light, fresh chicken and asparagus quiche is easy to make because you use cooked rotisserie chicken.
Kick start your day with this zesty omelet filled to the brim with spicy sausage, green chile peppers, and melted Mexican-style cheese.
A carton of refrigerated egg whites plus some onion, green pepper, and mushrooms makes a fast, protein-packed breakfast that you can cook in the microwave.
Simple, savory potato latkes with onion take only a few minutes to make, and use simple pantry ingredients.
Sweet maple syrup, savory bacon, and fluffy white cake are the perfect combination for an irresistible breakfast treat. Serve drizzled with additional maple syrup.


These fluffy pancakes have a light texture and a great, slightly-nutty taste. 
Spiced pumpkin bread, loaded with walnuts and chocolate chips, uses applesauce instead of oil for a crowd-pleasing treat during the holiday season.
This quick and easy recipe for eggs Florentine includes spinach, mushrooms, and cream cheese cooked with eggs and garlic for a simple breakfast.
This easy spinach-crusted quiche is made with baking mix, ham, and two kinds of cheese.
Kale and banana smoothie made with chilled coconut water and avocado is a filling, on-the-go breakfast.
Grandma's buttermilk waffle recipe is quick and easy to prepare; top with your favorite waffle toppings.
Oatmeal in grab-and-go form! Rolled oats are baked with cranberries, coconut, and chopped nuts for a new breakfast bar your family will love.
Make this sausage-, egg-, and cheese-stuffed casserole for your next weekend breakfast as a hearty and crowd-pleasing start to the day.
Sweet potato and chorizo hash seasoned with garlic powder and cayenne pepper is a tasty meal that is also paleo-friendly.
This recipe takes some favorite pizza toppings and turns them into a great party food! Served hot with RITZ Crackers, this creamy dip is easy to make. You can use pre-made meatballs or make your own, and with a few added Italian spices, this dip will become a staple at all of your get-togethers.
Bacon, bourbon, and apple pancakes deliver the perfect balance of sweet and savory for a warm breakfast on chilly weekend mornings.
Almond milk and almond extract work with banana and to sweeten and flavor rolled oats in this quick and easy breakfast recipe.
Wake up relaxed, refreshed and ready to eat, with this great dish from Johnsonville. Let your favorite breakfast ingredients simmer and meld together overnight and you'll have the perfect morning meal ready whenever you wake up!
Sneaking some shredded zucchini into these easy waffles is a great way to get your family to eat more veggies.
Chopped dates and almonds lend extra sweetness and fiber to this oat-wheat bread from the bread machine.
A smoothie with orange juice, pineapple, and banana - sweetened with honey.
A hearty and colorful 'pizza' made with crescent rolls, sausage, vegetables and cheese.
Three cheeses and green chile peppers are baked together in a delicious quiche.
Deliriously delicious juice to start your day! The result will be a lovely, creamy, silky smooth beverage - and with a lovely orange glow, it's a real eye catcher, too!
This is a wonderful casserole that everyone will love, grits lovers and non-grits lovers alike.  It's perfect for a brunch! Feel free to add more garlic powder to taste.
Fry up some bacon and sausage, scramble some eggs, and stuff it all into a pita pocket! This is a great, versatile way to enjoy a quick, filling breakfast. (And don't forget to pour on your favorite hot sauce!)
Eggs are poached in a garlicky tomato sauce in this Jordanian version of shakshuka, a Middle Eastern and North African classic.
This nicely spiced venison breakfast sausage is a snap to prepare!
Cream cheese and large eggs are the main ingredients in this low-carb breakfast option that's a cross between pancakes and crepes.
Subtly bitter green bell pepper brings out the sweetness of the ham and onions in Chef John's Denver omelet, a satisfying lunch or dinner option.
Oatmeal made in the rice cooker is simple to prepare and is ready in about 20 minutes!
This cheesy egg casserole with onion, bacon, and potatoes is like a gluten-free quiche, sure to be a crowd-pleaser at breakfast or brunch.
These flour-free oat cookies sweetened with mashed bananas and honey are a quick and easy snack you can enjoy when on a clean-eating diet.
Cream and butter are used to poach eggs in this rich and filling keto diet recipe served with a sprinkle of Cheddar cheese and scallions.
Spinach and bacon egg casserole is a delightful combination of colors and savory flavor and a hearty brunch or breakfast main dish.
This hearty breakfast bake with eggs, sweet potato, mushrooms, and sausage is a great way to start the day if you're on the Paleo diet.
Hash makes a fast brunch or even light supper dish. This variation is made with salmon fillets, onion, and plenty of potatoes, and is seasoned with fresh dill, ketchup, and Dijon mustard.
My aunt remembers my grandmother making these for the family during World War II when many food items were rationed.  Good at any time of day--breakfast, lunch, dinner, or midnight snack!
This wonderful wheat bread is full of nutty flavor. Four different seeds give this bread a memorable and wonderful texture. This bread makes a filling breakfast toast or a keep you-going-sandwich slicer.
This easy quiche makes its own crust as it bakes, thanks to the biscuit baking mix. It's filled with crumbled bacon, asparagus, and Swiss cheese. Use egg substitute or fresh eggs--whichever you prefer.
A favorite Sunday morning breakfast on the island of Trinidad in the Caribbean. Saltfish can be found in many grocery stores, ask your grocer to help you locate it. Serve this dish with sliced hard boiled eggs or simply serve with toast.
 Fat-free sour cream and reduced-fat margarine really make a dent in the fat gram count without sacrificing the yumminess factor of this banana nut bread.
Quick and easy huevos racheros are layered with Cheddar cheese, refried beans, salsa, and plenty of cilantro and are ready in under an hour.
The German-style pear pancake is baked in a cast-iron skillet for a fluffy and delightful breakfast or brunch treat.
This pancake recipe comes from a hand-written addition to my mother's cookbook.  It is simply the best pancake recipe I've ever tried.
These flavorful potato pancakes are loaded with bacon and thyme for a crunchy treat any time of the day.
Banana, almonds, and cocoa powder turn plain quick oats into a tasty breakfast. It's ready in just a few minutes.
Put the ooh-la-la into your French toast by using real brioche, the eggy, buttery bread from France. Unsweetened strawberry sauce helps cut the sweetness, and whipped cream amps up the richness. It's a special French toast for a special occasion.
Give your cuppa joe a nice, warm spicy taste with allspice and cinnamon. Just add the spices to coffee in your drip machine.
Light, fluffy pancakes that taste like gingerbread!  Great for the holidays!
Small tart shells are filled with bacon, Swiss cheese, and green onions creating a hearty mini quiche for brunches or dinner parties.
Louisiana style gets together with low-country cooking for a Cajun-inspired version of shrimp and grits with andouille sausage and the Cajun holy trinity - onion, bell pepper, and celery.
This quick and easy pumpkin spice protein drink will fill you up and is perfect for when you're on-the-go.
Enjoy this recipe for crustless quiche, made with bacon, sausage, eggs, and cream, if you are on a low-carb, high-fat diet (LCHF).
Start your day off right with a delicious bowl of oatmeal made with cinnamon, vanilla, and fresh blueberries.
This dish takes the traditional casserole and adds elements of Mexican cuisine and your favorite breakfast ingredients. Together with eggs and Johnsonville Hot & Spicy Breakfast Sausage Links, you've got a winning combination that'll take the boredom out of breakfast.
Drink in the season with this heavenly pumpkin spice latte that is quick and easy to make.
These pancakes are loaded with oats and accented with cinnamon for a heartier and tastier version of everyone's favorite breakfast quick bread.
These portion-controlled, protein-packed portable egg, zucchini, and scallion cups are excellent for on-the-go lifestyles.
Eggs combined with Butterball Smoked Sausage and vegetables provide a colorful and tasty dish for breakfast or brunch.
Put all the fixings for an omelet in a plastic bag and boil for a fun and easy 'omelet in a baggie' perfect for camping.
An old family recipe for whole wheat pancakes sweetened with brown sugar has been handed down for generations.
Spinach, bell pepper, and onion are baked with egg substitute in muffin cups to make the perfect on-the-go breakfast.
Save money by making your own homemade vanilla-flavored granola with this recipe using oats, almonds, and applesauce.
For all you maple fans who cannot get enough, here is a delicious zucchini-nut bread enhanced by maple flavoring.
This is a quick and easy recipe you'll want to treat yourself to any time of year.  An egg is scrambled with smoked salmon and served with toast.
French toast with a tropical twist and a delicious orange flavor. A recipe for tropical fruit sauce is included.
Pork is simmered with rice, served with salted egg and hundred-year egg then garnished with ginger and green onion. This is a favorite brunch item served in dim sum restaurants.
This make ahead meal is a great breakfast or brunch dish if you have company staying overnight. Ooey, gooey and tasty!
This mango milkshake with banana is great!
This banana bread has sweet rolled oats streusel on top, and makes two loaves.
Danish spiced rye bread is a wonderful addition to any holiday table. Enjoy with butter and jam at breakfast, use for sandwiches, or serve with dinner as a part of a winter feast. The spices in this bread are sure to make it a family favorite and tradition.
This almond flavored smoothie is a great way to get your day started. Feel free to try different flavors of yogurt.
Serve a taste of Hawaiian loco moco for breakfast - rice topped with a burger patty and fried onions, and brown gravy is topped with a fried egg.
Easy baked banana French toast, made with bananas, eggs, and milk and lightly seasoned with cinnamon and nutmeg is a healthy start to your day.
Scrambled eggs in a mug is a very quick and easy meal to make using 2 simple ingredients and is ready in less than 10 minutes.
Cinnamon roll dough is stuffed with crispy bacon, scrambled eggs, and Cheddar cheese to make these family-friendly breakfast bombs.
Baking bacon in the oven is a great way to get crispy, perfect bacon to serve with eggs or crumbled in salads.
This recipe is fantastic for breakfast. Serve with or without eggs. We love these on a Sunday morning.
Sliced bananas are topped with a chocolate and hazelnut liqueur sauce in this delicious dessert crepe recipe.
This is a very easy breakfast/brunch sandwich that even the children will love! My husband loves to use Maple syrup as a dip.
A delicious traditional English breakfast dish using smoked white fish, rice and eggs. It is based on the Indian dish Khichri and comes from the days of the Raj.
Spanish Tortilla is a tasty mixture of potatoes and eggs and can have a number of things added to it such as chorizo or spinach.
This tropical pink-tinged juice gets its zing from pineapple and a bit of fresh ginger!
These pancakes are made with sweet rice flour, soy yogurt, soy milk, and eggs. Get the sweet rice flour at the natural foods store.
This creamy and colorful quiche will stand out at your next brunch party.  Also works great as a main course for dinner.   It is very easy to make and tastes very gourmet.
This hot ham and cheese sandwich is dipped in egg and hot pepper sauce, then pan fried. Great brunch idea for teenagers, and you could experiment with different fillings.
This is a traditional breakfast in Britain. I make this most weekends, especially if there are guests or I've over-indulged with drinks the night before. You can leave out anything you don't have and can include other ingredients such as, black pudding, baked beans (the Heinz UK version) or even scrambled eggs. For more than one serving just multiply the ingredients.
Zucchini is the secret ingredient in this tasty and simple smoothie.
Wrap a banana, some cottage cheese, granola, pineapple and brown sugar in a tortilla, and take your breakfast with you.
Sauteed vegetables and potatoes topped with cheese and whole eggs.
This delicious breakfast casserole will have your guests screaming for the recipe!  Great for those wedding brunches and Sunday morning gatherings with friends and family.  So easy to make...and you save time by doing it the night before.
This simple and savory oven pancake is baked around pork sausage links until puffed and golden. Serve with chunky applesauce, maple syrup, or cranberry sauce.
This Brazilian variation is baked in a cake pan, is sweeter than some, and has cinnamon sugar sprinkled on top.
This is an excellent, spicy, quick-and-easy breakfast item of eggs scrambled in butter with sriracha and half-and-half.
Enjoy strawberries, banana, and your favorite chocolate-hazelnut spread together in smoothie-form!
Transform your overripe bananas into tasty banana waffles made with whole wheat flour for a hearty start to the day.
Frozen blueberries are blended into milk with Greek-style yogurt for a breakfast smoothie.
Sausage, egg, and cheese are sandwiched into glazed donut to make a quick and unique breakfast sandwich.
Prepare your oatmeal in the microwave and add canned pumpkin puree to make a quick and tasty breakfast grain.
A big skillet of crumbled cornbread, vegetables, sausage, and eggs will get your family off to a great start.
This traditional Danish breakfast treat made with a special aebleskiver pan is a cross between a pancake and a popover. Sprinkle with confectioners sugar or drizzle with maple syrup or jam.
Fresh blueberry sandwiches with a sweet almond and cream cheese filling are dipped in batter and pan-fried until golden brown. 
It's so easy to make French toast from scratch, then cook it golden brown in a waffle iron! Serve with butter, syrup, or jam.
These almond-filled rolled pancakes, served with chocolate sauce, make for a decadent breakfast or an elegant dessert.
This breakfast casserole is extra cheesy with shredded Cheddar cheese and nacho cheese soup whisked into the eggs.
These thin and delicate pancakes are made with cream cheese, egg, and just a bit of flour and sugar. They're sprinkled with confectioners' sugar and drizzled with lemon juice before serving.
Making a delicious blintz souffle is so easy when you use pre-made, frozen blintzes. 
Traditional banana nut bread gets fancy with the addition of blueberries. A brown sugar crumble topping is the final touch before it is baked to perfection.
Classic monkey bread gets a sweet and sticky addition of butterscotch in this family-pleasing breakfast.
A warm cinnamon apple filling gives these classic crepes a hint of sweetness that the whole family will love.
This baked egg and artichoke dish is given extra body with the addition of Cheddar cheese and crumbled saltine crackers.
This is a fast smoothie recipe using oats, creating a filling vegan strawberry and banana drink with a deep pink color and a creamy texture.
Coconut milk is the milk-replacement in this quick and easy recipe for fluffy breakfast pancakes.
These banana bread baked oatmeal breakfast bars are the perfect breakfast for those days when you really want a muffin but need something heartier.
This peanut butter, banana, and oat smoothie is a creamy and filling on-the-go breakfast.
Using a blender to mix the batter for these apple cinnamon pancakes gets breakfast on the table in no time.
Chopped deli ham and strips of cheese create layers of flavor in this baked egg casserole.
All the flavors of a molasses spice cookie are blended into a rich and hearty smoothie perfect for autumn mornings or afternoon snacks.
This baked-oatmeal recipe makes its way to you from the Dominican Republic.
This is an easy variation on the basic French toast recipe, except it uses reduced fat substitutes! Serve with fruit or sugar-free maple syrup.
A zesty Mexican-inspired casserole that is easy to prepare. Baked eggs, corn tortillas, and vegetables are smothered in a hearty enchilada sauce.
Always a popular combination, Bosc pear slices, crumbled bacon, and melted blue cheese top focaccia bread slices to make tantalizing broiled sandwiches to serve for brunch or a light supper.
In the North of Ireland, locals treat themselves to this enormous breakfast on the weekends. The fried breads make it unique. Soda bread and potato farls are cooked in reserved bacon fat making them golden and crispy. Served alongside Irish bacon, sausage, black pudding, tomato and egg - you won't need to eat again for the rest of the day!
A simple, tasty concoction that combines chopped hard-cooked eggs, tomato, and crumbled turkey bacon.
This frittata recipe calls for fresh pumpkin, potato, spinach, and feta and Cheddar cheeses.
This rich egg and cheese casserole is a great way to start the day.
This granola recipe is tried and tested, I bring with me all my camping trips.  It also makes a very filling and delicious breakfast.  The only main ingredient in this recipe is the oatmeal, all the other ingredients can be substituted.  This recipe is made without adding any honey or sugar, although if you don't have any dates at of home you can always add 1/2 cup honey to the other ingredients.
Ham, turkey, Cheddar cheese and vegetables are the filling for these big stuffed omelets that will satisfy appetites of all sizes!
Scrambled eggs together with chopped tomatoes is a favorite in our family. This is an extremely easy dish that is delicious and quick to prepare. Serve with rice.
If you have a pound of ham plus potatoes and a few seasonings, you can whip up this brunch classic!
Pancake mix is blended with soy milk, cinnamon sugar and honey. These pancake bites make everyone who eats them turn into pancake obsessed zombies!
What's better than pancakes for breakfast? Oatmeal scotchie cookie-inspired pancakes! Try this recipe featuring oats and butterscotch chips.
Egg and cheese are fried together to form Chef John's new breakfast masterpiece on toast: runny yolk surrounded by a crispy layer of Cheddar.
This green breakfast smoothie is an easy way to get a couple servings of fruit and veggies. With kale, berries, and a banana, it'll keep you full all morning.
Cornmeal adds texture to the traditional waffle recipe and gives them the name "gritty waffles" that your family will be asking for often.
Stuff crescent dough with ham and Gruyere cheese for a week's worth of grab-and-go breakfast croissants.
Combining breakfast sausage, dry mustard, and Cheddar cheese, this keto egg casserole is easy to make ahead of time as a filling breakfast.
A tangy, ooey gooey omelet sure to please the pampered palette. I like to use Dubliner Irish cheese instead of Parmesan if I can get it.
Use your favorite frozen berries, along with soy milk, orange juice and wheat germ, to make this quick liquid breakfast.
Eggnog added to waffle batter adds a touch of holiday flavor to these crisp Belgian waffles topped with warm raspberry preserves and fresh raspberries. Add a dollop of whipped cream if desired for a special Christmas breakfast or brunch.
This is a chocolate and coffee-lover's favorite! Using a home espresso machine, mix espresso, chocolate, and steamed milk--then top with whipped cream.
Our Southwest Hash Browns and spicy sausage give this hearty egg bake real Mexican flavor. It makes a great brunch dish or easy dinner.
Personal size omelets served with a flavorful tomato sauce.
A tasty treat that will satisfy your sweet tooth. Crumbled cornflakes make the texture a little different than most other recipes.
Pork sausage, biscuit mix, Swiss cheese, and eggs are baked into a great finger-food breakfast that can be easily reheated in the microwave to enjoy throughout the day.
This is a great way to use up leftover ham. It's an easy-to-make omelet that kids and adults both love.
This is a great Christmas morning treat. Make it the night before and pop it in the oven in the morning.
This started out as a simple apple coffeecake but I added leftover ham and maple syrup and adjusted other seasonings for a great brunch dish.
This is a very easy quiche. I serve it for breakfast when I have guests with muffins and fresh fruit.
Blessedly heavy on the coconut, thanks to two packages of pudding mix, this sweet quick bread is gently spiced with cinnamon.
This is a lovely spiced tea loaf for the bread machine with a reasonably short rise time for a yeast bread.
A traditional Native American bread. Great served with honey, jam, or butter.
Irish Soda Bread for the bread machine. This recipe makes a wonderfully tasty loaf.
Hala kahiki, the Hawaiian word for pineapple, green smoothie made with spinach is a refreshing and tropical way to start the day.
Roll crescent roll dough around creamy breakfast sausage for crowd-pleasing sausage rolls at your next brunch or party.
Start the morning off right by eating these egg salad English muffins with a spicy kick!
Liven up your breakfast with a poblano pepper stuffed with scrambled eggs and melted Cheddar-jack cheese for a spicy, Mexican-inspired meal.
Here's our impossibly easy pies packed with pork and Green Giant(R) mushrooms; made using Original Bisquick(R) mix  perfect for breakfast.
Eggs beaten with milk and sour cream are baked with bell pepper, mushrooms, and green onion for a great option for serving a group at breakfast.
Blend mango, oats, yogurt, orange juice, and banana together to make this recipe for a delicious breakfast smoothie.
Breakfast casserole, made with sausage, crescent rolls, eggs, and Cheddar cheese, is always a welcome treat on holiday mornings.
This baked pancake is topped with a layer of cinnamon-accented peach slices for a fruity brunch treat.
Using refrigerated crescent roll for the dough, this breakfast pizza is topped with a layer of prepared salsa before being covered with scrambled eggs, bacon, slices of sausage, and Cheddar cheese.
Cute mini-quiches contain spinach, imitation crab, and 3 different cheeses. Serve them warm topped with sour cream and salsa or just grab a couple for an easy, portable breakfast.
Turn the toppings from your leftover pizza into a unique scrambled egg dish.
Soft cooked eggs are cooked with tomatoes and zucchini in this colorful and hearty dish.
A baked egg casserole with chicken, bacon, tomatoes, blue cheese, and chives.  
An old-time supper skillet with potatoes, sausage, peppers, and eggs is perfect for a hearty hot dinner on a weeknight. 
Easy and delicious eggs coated in sausage are baked in the oven until browned. It's a perfect dish for your Easter brunch, for a fun breakfast anytime, and to take along with you for lunch.
Lightly sweetened iced tea gets fruity, refreshing flavors, and a pretty pink color from fresh raspberries and lemonade mix for a perfect summer cooler.
Cinnamon, ginger, and honey make a syrup with fresh pears in this French toast casserole.
This casserole of hash browns, green chiles, and sausage is assembled the night before, and makes a welcome addition to a special brunch.
Heart-shaped waffles are a traditional treat throughout Scandinavia, made crisp in Sweden and soft-textured in Norway. Topped with jam or berries and whipped cream, or wafer-thin slices of gjeitost (Norwegian brown goat cheese), they're a favorite with coffee or as a snack.
In this recipe, a savory, cheese-filled pancake is folded around mushrooms, spinach, and Canadian bacon for a delicious anytime pancake!
An easy Irish soda bread uses self-rising flour and lots of raisins for a rich flavor.
Cream of chicken soup, French onion dip, and hash brown potatoes combine in this cheesy casserole recipe.
Buttery croissants replace standard English muffins in this elegant egg breakfast dish. Asparagus spears add a fresh and flavorful crunch.
Make this recipe for a blueberry banana oatmeal smoothie when you need a quick and easy breakfast or snack.
Buckwheat and almond flours are the key ingredients in these gluten-free waffles that are crispy on the outside and soft and delicious on the inside.
This breakfast casserole dish mixes potatoes, sausage, and egg in a cheesy baked dish everyone will love.
Start off your day with a hearty burrito packed with chili beans, eggs scrambled with crumbled bacon, shredded cheese, and more!
Zucchini plum bread is a clever way to use late summer produce in a tasty breakfast treat the whole family will enjoy.
This crustless spaghetti squash quiche is nicely seasoned with flecks of green thanks to spinach added to the mix. Serve for breakfast or brunch.
This hot, hearty, paleo-friendly 'oatmeal' is filled with apples, raisins, pecans, and walnuts.
Ground ham, onions and broccoli are melded with cornmeal, Asiago cheese, eggs, garlic and a sprinkling of dried basil and anise seed, to make tender fried patties for a post-holiday brunch.
This fresh and friendly vegetable bake is easy to make and packed with goodness.
These stuffed pita are a great use for leftovers!  I combined a couple of different recipes to come up with this mixture.  The almonds and grapes really compliment the ham.
A rich savory custard pie made with cheddar cheese, similar to quiche.
This popover pie using curry and ham is perfect for breakfast, lunch, or supper. So quick and easy to prepare.  It's attractive and tastes good, too.  Top each serving with a dollop of yogurt and chutney.
This simple side dish originates from Switzerland. This recipe lends itself well to added ingredients, some of which might include bacon, onions, or cheese.
Growing up in the U.K. we used to make this all the time.  Our guests have asked so many times for this recipe.  Well here it is.  I bake this quiche for friends at Christmas.  Just wrap up in aluminum and voila! A tasty Christmas breakfast that they can wake up to.
Eggs, bacon and potatoes all blend into one dish for a simple breakfast option. Serve it with ketchup for the kids or with a dill pickle for a German-style brunch.
This is a refreshing and healthy protein smoothie made with fresh oranges, bananas, strawberries, sherbet and cranberry juice.  Save money by making your own fruit smoothie at home versus going to a juice place!
This is a fine Spanish potluck dish that can be served hot or cold, is inexpensive, delicious, and easy to pack. Hope there will be leftovers to take home, but don't count on it.
I invented this recipe when I started running out of smoothie components.  I think it tastes like a cross between peaches and cream, and egg nog (there are no eggs in it though).  The oats and/or wheat germ can be omitted for a smoother smoothie.
This is a winter favorite of ours, that builds on a traditional British breakfast dish. We add sultanas, bananas and cinnamon and it's awesome.
Hash makes a fast brunch or even light supper dish. This variation is made with pulled rotisserie chicken, onion, bell pepper, and plenty of potatoes, and is seasoned with fresh cilantro, chili powder, ketchup, and Dijon mustard.
This hearty Hawaiian-style breakfast is quick to make. Rice is served with eggs and fried Spam, topped with hot brown gravy.
French toast slices are filled with bacon, turkey, ham, and provolone cheese in this mashup version of Monte Cristo sandwich.
Lactaid(R) cottage cheese, eggs, diced green chilies and sweet peppers combine for protein-packed breakfast muffins.
Traditional Swedish pancakes are easy to prepare with 6 simple ingredients. Roll them up and serve with lingonberries and confectioners' sugar.
Sweet, mild sausage, red bell peppers, corn kernels, and Cheddar cheese make delicious savory breakfast muffins. To delight and amaze your friends, tuck a shelled soft-cooked egg inside each one before baking!
Biscuit cups are filled with a savory blend of eggs, bacon, seasoning, and Cheddar-Monterey Jack shreds--perfect for breakfast, lunch, or dinner.
Homemade black bean and avocado salsa is rolled inside a tortilla with cheese. For breakfast burritos, add an egg or two.
Bake these fun mini frittatas in a muffin tin for a satisfying on-the-go snack filled with smoked sausage, hash browns, and bell pepper.
A festive punch made with grapefruit soda and white grape juice is a fun, nonalcoholic way to celebrate.
This sausage and cheese quick bread is perfect for a holiday brunch. It makes good leftovers, too.
A little brown mustard mixed into the custard is the flavor secret for this deep dish quiche, perfect for brunch, lunch, or dinner.
A delicious omelet made with Dungeness crab, mushrooms, and Swiss cheese.
This is one of my favorite dishes to make whenever I have some zucchini on hand. Some people tell me that it doesn't look so good, but once you try it, I think you'll like it. The mixture of vegetables, eggs, peppers and tomato sauce gives it color, besides some protein. You might like the taste better than the looks of it. Give it a shot, it won't kill yah!!
This is an awesome, addictive, one hundred percent vegan granola. Excellent for sprinkling on soy yogurt or in a bowl with rice milk.
This German dessert that tastes like a cross between a pancake and a waffle.  It's also good for breakfast.
You'll be surprised how wonderful sauteed apples and eggs taste together! Serve warm with apple butter or maple syrup.
A hearty make ahead breakfast casserole that's as filling as it is delicious. 
This honey-oat yeast bread incorporates a modest amount of strawberries and cream cheese to enliven the bread without overwhelming it.
This recipe for a healthy, semi-sweet, dark, and hearty loaf of bread features molasses and oat bran.
This sugar-glazed quick bread is loaded with coconut, but sour cream in the batter tempers the sweetness just enough.
Lighter than hollandaise but just as rich and creamy, this flavorful avocado sauce makes delicious eggs benedict with roasted tomatoes and crumbled bacon.
Sausage and mushrooms are baked into this 2-cheese quiche for a crowd-pleasing breakfast or dinner.
Egg whites, beaten until fluffy, lighten the texture of these hearty waffles made with rolled oats.
These flavorful sweet potato waffles, topped with cranberry maple syrup, make a deliciously festive breakfast.
You can have sausage, eggs, and hash browns ready for you when you wake up thanks to this slow cooker breakfast casserole recipe.
Pumpkin cornmeal pancakes make for the perfect fall breakfast with some pecans and real maple syrup over the top.
Homemade waffles receive a new twist thanks to malted milk powder added to the batter for a quick and easy breakfast treat.
Mixed with eggs, Cheddar cheese, and Parmesan cheese, this low-carb recipe for scrambled cauliflower is sure to become a brunch favorite.
Practically a meal in a muffin, these corn muffins are made with mustard, shredded Cheddar cheese, and crumbled bacon.
Feta cheese, oregano, and basil give this colorful veggie-stuffed omelet its distinctive Greek flavor.
This comforting breakfast casserole is great for using leftover ham; just chop it up and bake it with creamy, smooth grits, and Cheddar cheese.
Sorghum flour, tapioca starch, xanthan gum, and baking powder stand in for baking mix or all-purpose flour in this waffle recipe.
A light orange flavor enhances this baked French toast casserole. Make it ahead of time and let it chill overnight. In the morning, just pull it out and bake it for a family treat.
Here's a very quick and easy version of the popular Southern-style breakfast that anyone can make.
Pumpkin beer and chia seed create an incredibly moist and flavorful bread. It's the perfect fall-inspired bread!
Pizza is a great way to start the day!
A combination of ground brown rice, quinoa, millet, buckwheat, cornmeal, amaranth, sesame seed, and flax seed makes a satisfying gluten-free hot breakfast cereal.
Apple chicken sausage and hash browns are baked right into this breakfast casserole.
Perfect for dinner on a busy night, this omelet is filled with luscious cream and mozzarella cheeses, sliced black olives, and flaky tuna fish.
Swiss cheese and imitation crabmeat flavor the filling in a rich-tasting but surprisingly budget-friendly quiche.
Buttery croissants make up the base of these cheese and spinach mini quiches. Serve as a quick and easy appetizer or brunch item that will make everyone come back for more.
A creamy quiche made with a prepared deep-dish pie crust is studded with tender shrimp and pieces of asparagus beneath a topping of Monterey Jack cheese.
Puree bananas and a peach, and add the secret ingredient of hot chocolate mix for a new twist on the traditional banana bread.
This crustless vegetarian quiche with leeks, mushrooms, and sweet potatoes is seasoned with thyme and makes a great breakfast or main dish for any meal.
Brighten up your morning with this scramble featuring pepper jack cheese, pan-crisped chorizo, and tortilla strips.
These simple crepes will melt in your mouth, especially after adding cheese, berries, or lemon filling. Kids and adults  will love them!
Grandfather's recipe for pancakes from scratch produces thick and fluffy pancakes the whole family will love.
Whip up this high-protein vanilla mango smoothie when you need a quick-and-easy refreshing treat.
This refreshing summer smoothie made with blueberries, cucumber, and vanilla yogurt will have you feeling super!
Cornbread made in the waffle maker is a quick and easy spin on making the traditional recipe.
This fragrant poppy seed loaf is topped with a simple orange glaze.
Sweet potato and banana are mixed with protein powder and eggs creating a higher protein pancake that everyone in the family will enjoy.
Monkey bread muffins are individualize-size versions of the traditional pull-apart bread that everyone loves.
A light, slightly sweet golden rye that 's peppered with caraway and fennel seeds and scented with orange zest, this is truly one of Sweden's national treasures.
A new twist on the usual French toast. Easy to make and kids of all ages love 'em! Serve topped with syrup, apple or honey butter.
This ice-cold drink combines the wonderful flavors of chocolate, coffee, and ice cream. It's quick and easy, as well as perfect for a summer day.
Tender asparagus, poached eggs, and toast make an elegant breakfast for four. Add ham or Canadian bacon, if desired.
These sausage burgers are a spicy twist on fast-food breakfast sandwiches, and would also make a great dinner on the go. Don't let the pickle and onion scare you off. These are really easy to throw together and very satisfying.
This delicious and classy sandwich is a twist on the traditional recipe by substituting Gouda for Gruyere, adding a splash of white wine to the cheese sauce, and building it on San Francisco-style sourdough bread.
Use this basic recipe to make your favorite flavored latte with a home espresso machine.
I created this recipe when trying to get my husband to stop eating fast food for breakfast. Crispy on the outside and full of maple walnut flavor on the inside. I make 6 at a time and freeze them -- just pop in the toaster or microwave to reheat. Serve with maple syrup and a sprinkling of walnuts.
This biscuit breakfast sandwich is made with green chiles, bacon, jalapenos, onions, eggs, and Jack cheese.  Get up and go with some spice! I prefer to roast my own green chiles, but you can use a can of green chile.
These almond flour and tapioca-based pancakes made with almond milk and eggs are quick and easy to make and fit into the paleo lifestyle.
This crustless hash browns quiche is an easy, cheesy mashup of two classic dishes that's great served for breakfast, brunch, or dinner.
Bananas, strawberries, almond milk, cinnamon, and vanilla come together in this creamy banana split-inspired smoothie.
Baked oatmeal, made with applesauce, cinnamon, and vanilla extract, is kid-approved, quick and easy, and perfect for on-the-go breakfasts.
Layers of tortillas, green chile peppers, sausage, and cheese are baked immersed in beaten egg for a southwestern-style brunch casserole ideal for entertaining.
These potato scones are the perfect side with any breakfast meal and are sure to become a family favorite!
This pumpkin pie smoothie, made with banana, pumpkin, cinnamon, and yogurt, is a hearty and filling way to start the day.
This strawberry, banana, and peanut butter protein shake is a great post-work meal or on-the-go breakfast.
Chocolate coconut overnight oats, made with almond milk, is a dairy-free, vegan breakfast perfect for on-the-go eating.
This hearty breakfast casserole with sausage, bacon, potatoes, eggs, and shredded cheese will serve a crowd.
This crustless cheeseburger quiche made with ground beef, bacon, and Cheddar cheese is a weeknight dinner option that's Atkins-friendly.
A unique cauliflower crust serves as the base of this cheesy quiche featuring smoked sausage and sweet peppers.
Make delicious baked chicken crepes with a cheesy, creamy filling of Mexican-style flavors such as jalapenos, cumin, and pepper Jack cheese.
Spaghetti and veggies meet an egg omelet in this quick and delicious one-pot brunch dish.
Eggs, bacon, and potatoes are all cooked together in one skillet in this hearty, quick and easy breakfast that is great while camping.
Nutritious and easy, these overnight chia oats can help jumpstart your day. Customize by adding your favorite toppings and almondmilk flavor.
These are not a sweet waffle!  I use them to serve creamed beef or chicken for a quick, easy supper.  They are very light, very tasty, and they smell heavenly.
Hash makes a fast brunch or even light supper dish. This variation is made with Italian sausage, onion, and a potato and apple mixture, and is seasoned with parsley and sage.
A real hit in the house at breakfast time. These waffles smell and taste like an apple pie. Serve with real maple syrup or even vanilla ice cream!
Give your eggs a little bit of a kick by adding barbeque sauce!
This recipe for a quick, hot breakfast cereal is sweetened with sugar substitute and dried plums.
Made with instant oatmeal, yogurt and banana this is a light tasting smoothie that will fill you up!
A different twist on comfort food for breakfast.  Cream cheese added to the eggs makes them extra-decadent, while the curry and shallots make them extra-savory.  Delicious served on warmed plates with toast on a cold Seattle morning!
This is my husband's favorite meal. I always had a different version of Corned beef hash until I met my Scottish husband who taught me how it was meant to be made. It is a wonderful casserole type dish that is very filling and perfect for cold nights in. Serve with vegetables or crusty French bread.
This tropical fruit smoothie is a lot of fun for kids. I made it up after an afternoon outside with a friend. It's best in summer because there is better fruit.
This quick, frosty blender recipe has a thick texture, beautiful colors, and a fruity, mojito-like taste.
Potatoes, bacon and eggs unite in this all-in-one breakfast cupcake.
A delightful banana oatmeal bread baked in the bread machine.
This quick bread recipe delivers a tasty orange flavor to go with the added texture of the chopped walnuts.
A delicious way to get your '5-a-day.' It's a quick and easy breakfast, but great any time of day! Nectarines, strawberries, and blueberries blended with nonfat milk and ice!
No flour to be found in these gluten-free chocolate chip-filled waffles made with eggs and mashed banana.
Wheat germ and whole wheat flour make these pancakes extra good for you. Perhaps you can be a little less guilty for having bacon too!
Spinach and kale are the hidden veggies in this sweet green juice that the whole family will love.
Traditional quiche Lorraine is baked into a rich, custard-like texture thanks to the addition of sour cream to the recipe.
This creamy strawberry and pineapple smoothie is a quick and tasty way to start the day off using only 4 simple ingredients.
Pancakes lined with bacon strips are topped with maple peanut butter sauce for a sweet and savory breakfast that is kid- and adult-friendly.
Start your morning right and perk up with this quick and easy homemade mocha smoothie.
Orange, banana, yogurt, strawberries, and flax seeds make up this recipe for a quick and easy breakfast smoothie.
Feed a crowd with this delicious layered egg casserole with mushrooms, sausage, tomatoes, and cheese.
A delicious, nutrient-rich and satisfying breakfast for cold mornings has quinoa for protein and chewiness, prunes for fiber and sweetness, and vanilla almond milk, nutmeg, and cinnamon for feel-good flavor!
Baked sweet potato add extra moisture and color to this sweet, spiced bread. Pecans are stirred into the batter and sprinkled on top for a nutty flavor.
Turn your morning tomato juice into a savory eye-opening drink by adding steak sauce, smoky barbeque sauce, and a hint of spice. Serve on ice with a lemon wedge and a celery stick, if you like. It makes a perfect bloody mary when you add vodka.
Applesauce adds more flavor and moisture to this spiced pecan bread that's perfect for breakfast or an on-the-go snack.
Bake this sweet apple walnut bread just before your guests arrive for a cinnamon and sugar scented house. You will have everyone coming back for seconds.
A savory bread pudding made with vegetarian sausage, cheese, and eggs.
Oatmeal with almonds and apple chunks makes a deliciously filling breakfast when you're in a hurry.
Thick and hearty whole-grain flatbreads are sweet with the flavors of honey and molasses, and come together for a quick treat with butter, jam, or honey. Whip up four breads in only 30 minutes.
Shhh. Don't tell, but this hash is all about the veggies. Sandwiched between a layer of ground beef and strips of bacon, you'll find loads of potatoes, carrots, corn, green beans, and onion. Let them think it's all about the meat!
Briny feta cheese and smokey fire-roasted tomatoes transform eggs and bread into a breakfast masterpiece.
This variation on a traditional Hangtown Fry contains grated cheese, fresh basil, and oregano, and is finished under the broiler where the egg and oyster mixture puffs up and browns.
Refrigerated crescent roll dough makes an easy crust for this savory ham and Cheddar cheese pie.
Pan-fried potatoes are seasoned with onion powder and garlic powder before mixing with liverwurst in this easy breakfast hash recipe.
Make this easy and rich crab and Cheddar cheese quiche with a prepared pie crust for a special brunch treat.
Quinoa is simmered in apple juice and chopped apples for a sweet, hearty breakfast to start the day.
This lighter version of French toast casserole eliminates the sugar and butter, yet still tastes great. Make it the night before and pop it in the oven in the morning for fuss-free breakfast morning prep!
Sausage and eggs with crisp tender peppers and onions are topped with shredded Cheddar cheese and rolled up in wheat tortillas for a hearty on-the-go breakfast.
Egg substitute, part-skim mozzarella, and fat-free evaporated milk are what make this delicious quiche waist-line friendly.
This baked pancake is topped with a layer of peach slices, for a fruity breakfast treat.
Start your morning off with a kick by blending avocado, kale, lemon, ginger, and colorful vegetables together into a refreshing smoothie.
Garlic and the fresh taste of lemon flavor these easy shrimp served over bowls of hot cooked grits.
Mix up a savory combination of eggs, mushrooms, spinach, and cheeses in an oven-proof skillet and bake the crustless quiche right in the skillet. Jalapeno yogurt cheese adds creaminess and a hint of spice.
Carrot banana bread is a new twist on the traditional banana bread recipe. Make for gifts during the holiday season!
Egg muffins, with spinach, bacon, mushrooms, and onion, are an excellent and paleo-friendly way to start your day.
When oats, milk, raisins, cinnamon, and vanilla are microwaved together, you end up with a bowl of oatmeal that tastes like an oatmeal cookie.
Cinnamon and nutmeg added to pancake batter create French toast pancakes, a perfect fusion of breakfast favorites.
Chef John's take on the famous Joe's Special includes eggs scrambled with ground beef, spinach, and mushrooms.
This strawberry smoothie made with oats, yogurt, and banana is a great on-the-go meal made with a Nutribullet(R) or blender.
Pumpkin bread is made easy thanks to the secret ingredient of vanilla pudding mix creating a delicious breakfast treat or snack.
This granola recipe is loaded with chocolate chips, coconut, and sunflower seeds and coated in honey and peanut butter for a sweet and crunchy snack or breakfast treat.
All the great flavors of French toast in a fun to eat no-knead fluffin!
Crepes are great to make ahead and stuff with your favourite fillings - sweet or savoury!
Gluten-free protein pancakes made with cottage cheese, egg whites, and oats are a quick and easy breakfast. Serve with berries!
Carrot souffle made with carrots, eggs, coconut flour, and coconut oil is a colorful paleo-friendly dish. Sprinkle with cinnamon before serving!
Eggs cooked with spinach, mushrooms, tomatoes, and mozzarella cheese are a Florentine-inspired breakfast item.
This breakfast casserole is a hearty blend of eggs, rice and cheese.
Orange juice and dried apricots blend into a fruity sensation in this quick bread.  A scattering of chocolate chips makes a perfect finish.
Chopped spinach is whipped up in the blender with eggs, bread crumbs, and half-and-half. This is spread in the bottom of a pie pan, and covered with a delicious puree of sweet potatoes and pumpkin spiced up with curry powder, cumin, cinnamon and nutmeg. The two layers are swirled together to create a marble effect, and then the pie is baked for 30 minutes to make an attractive, flavorful quiche.
A quick and easy breakfast casserole that you can cook in the microwave. Perfect for dorm parties!
This pancake recipe is as good as it gets. Cinnamon, oatmeal and raisins make this a too good, and sinfully tasty pancake!
Steak and eggs wrapped in a flour tortillas with peppers, mushrooms and onions. Top it off with a Mimosa and you're in heaven!
Great for breakfast or brunch.  Combines eggs with delicious potatoes in a very short time.
This recipe fuses an American breakfast favorite-hash browns-with some South Asian flavors with cilantro and curry powder to make a surprisingly tangy side dish to spice up your morning.
A very strong, sweet black tea and lemonade mix is sweetened and chilled to make a refreshing summer drink. 
When there's no time to fuss over a pie crust, this crustless spinach and cheese quiche is the timesaving dish you're looking for.  It's full of the good stuff too - spinach, cheese, sour cream, and green chiles.
Strawberries, bananas, and soy milk combine with flaxseed to create this tasty, dairy-free smoothie.
Pikelets are the Scottish version of the southern British crumpet. Serve with fresh-squeezed lemon juice and sugar, or with butter and jam.
This recipe is a favorite in my family!  I take a French class and I bring these little sandwiches to the French meeting.  This typical French delectable is always on the menu in little French cafes.
Even the kids will eat this spinach and beef pie.
This is a rich waffle recipe based on a Danish batter for aebleskivers.  It uses sugar and is wonderful and crisp.  We always freeze the extra waffles and the kids heat them during the week.  A minute in the microwave and a quick trip into the toaster renews the warmth and crispness anytime.
Cinnamon raisin bread is topped with a white chocolate-cream cheese mixture and sliced strawberries. Pan-toasted, they're served drizzled with maple syrup.
I just thought this up one morning, trying to think of something different to have for breakfast.  Ham, spinach, fried eggs, pineapple-curry sauce makes a surprisingly yummy combination.  Serve over toast or English muffins if you like.
A yummy banana smoothie that's great for breakfast.
Prep these fruity, creamy oats the night before and in the morning you've got a quick, fresh breakfast.
Brown sugar apples topped with bacon is a perfect combination of sweet and salty, a quick and easy camping recipe the whole family will love.
Make your morning special with these banana poppy seed pancakes sweetened with honey and supplemented with fiber-rich whole wheat flour.
Rich milk chocolate drink mix and Greek yogurt make these delicious chocolate muffins high in protein, low in fat, but high in flavor.
Studded with raisins, this rich breakfast casserole can be prepared the night before and baked in the morning.
Slices of bread are dipped in a mixture of milk and cinnamon in this easy recipe for eggless French toast that's ready in 15 minutes.
If you're a fan of spinach quiche, spanakopita or any version of Greek-inspired spinach-and-feta pie, chances are you'll like these easy-to-make squares.
This recipe for Swedish waffles produces a crispy outside and tender inside and has been passed down through the generations.
The avocado makes this healthy breakfast smoothie almost more rich in texture than a milkshake.
Baked oatmeal with nonfat dry milk and eggs is a protein-packed and portable way to eat oatmeal on the go.
Avocado and strawberry smoothie with orange juice and vanilla yogurt is a great pick-me-up post workout or as an on-the-go breakfast.
What better way to start your morning than with this quick and easy pina colada smoothie, made with mango, pineapple, milk, and coconut yogurt.
This quick and easy recipe has only five ingredients and makes delicious ham and cheese mini-frittatas.
Swap coconut milk in for regular milk in this recipe for fluffy pancakes for a creamy and rich version of the classic breakfast treat.
These nutty, gluten-free pancakes flavored with applesauce and cinnamon make a quick and easy breakfast for anyone on the paleo diet.
Leftover roast beef adds delicious heft to this quick and easy brunch hash made with potatoes, onion, green bell pepper, and mushrooms.
Eggs, cottage cheese, Cheddar, spinach, and mushrooms come together in a vegetarian breakfast entree that's simple to make the night before.
Enjoy a hot breakfast of lightly sweetened semolina porridge--the best cream of wheat you've ever had.
These fragrant pumpkin waffles made with coconut oil, almond milk, and maple syrup are perfect to pass around at a gluten-free brunch.
Make a batch of these sausage and scallion egg muffins for a week of on-the-go breakfasts or an easy lunch or dinner with a side salad.
If you love something crunchy-sweet in the morning, this homemade keto cinnamon granola recipe is quick, easy, flavorful, and low in carbs.
A delicious fruit smoothie made with blueberries, apples, raspberries and grapes.
Best described as scrambled pancakes.  My grandmother made this for us when we were kids.  Best served with lots of powdered sugar and maple syrup!
Great for brunch. A nice alternative to sweet waffles, these cornmeal waffles are ironed with a slice of bacon, and served with a creamy cheese sauce.
Eggs, mango chutney, and chili sauce are stacked between slices of toast to create a sandwich imagined in a work of science fiction. This version is indeed culinary fact.
Blueberries are blended with apple juice, banana, iced tea mix, and lemon juice in this refreshing and delicious smoothie. Enjoy this for an easy breakfast or as an afternoon pick-me-up.
This is a white chocolate version of a classic mocha. No reason to head to the cafe--stay in and use your home espresso machine to brew up this delicious espresso drink.
Bursting with flavor, these little morsels make a clever presentation for weekend breakfast or brunch!
Made with recipe-ready Simply Potatoes mashed and shredded potatoes, plus bacon bits and Cheddar cheese. Talk about comfort food.
Absolutely wonderful fruit smoothie with raspberries, blueberries, strawberries and more!  I have this for breakfast every morning.
Yeasted pancakes that are light, airy and delicious.
This delicious vegetarian omelet is stuffed with mushrooms, cheese and peppers.
This easy casserole is a great way to use up leftover hard-boiled eggs.
An easy recipe using the goodness of wheat and barley nugget cereal.
 Almonds, hazelnuts or cashews would work particularly well with the apricot halves in this delicious bread.
A trip to the health food store will be necessary for these flapjacks, but it is worth it. While there, pick up some real maple syrup to serve with them!
Apples and oats are prepared overnight in a slow cooker with a mixture of spices for a tasty breakfast treat the entire family can dig.
Eggs, assorted veggies, shredded cheese, hash browns, and bacon make a great brunch casserole that feeds a crowd.
Impress your family members with a fluffy omelet filled with cream cheese, tomato, and chives for your fancy weekend brunch.
Oats, Greek yogurt, almond milk, cinnamon, and peaches are refrigerated in a jar overnight to make a delicious overnight oatmeal everyone will love.
These butter-infused scrambled eggs with lobster have just the right balance of decadence and kick.
Elvis would love this banana smoothie made with almond butter, skim milk, vanilla extract, and just a pinch of cinnamon.
This is a slow cooker recipe for a hot breakfast cereal that will have you waking up to the a delicious aroma ready to eat.
Sausage, Cheddar cheese, Swiss cheese, and sour cream are baked with eggs to create a rich, crustless quiche.
Maple syrup, cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves spice up these pancakes for a new twist on morning pancakes.
A French toast sandwich filled with bananas and cinnamony eggs.
The batter for these Danish-style pancakes is seasoned with cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves and can be used by itself or with a variety of fillings.
A spicy mixture of sweet potato, garlic, and onion is topped with pan-fried eggs, cilantro, feta cheese, and avocado for a tasty breakfast indulgence.
This delicious asparagus and Canadian bacon quiche mimics the flavor of eggs Benedict, but it's so much easier. For a true eggs Benedict flavor, top with Hollandaise sauce.
These potato pancakes include shredded apples and green onions for a new twist to the traditional recipe. Top with sour cream.
Refrigerated biscuits get a savory ham and Swiss cheese filling for an easy breakfast or brunch main dish. Use your choice of canned ham, turkey, chicken, or leftover meats.
Portobello mushroom, red onion, and pesto flavor this egg white omelette.
Don't overlook quick-cooking quinoa as a hot breakfast cereal, especially when it's topped with peaches and yogurt. Cinnamon, nutmeg, and a bit of honey and lime juice add their delicious flavors.
Soy 'cream cheese' is flavored with vanilla extract and coconut milk in this vegan dessert filling.
Assemble this easy egg, bacon, Cheddar cheese, and asparagus casserole the night before, then bake and serve the next day. It's perfect for Easter morning or anytime you'd like a great make-ahead meal.
Oat bran, wheat bran, wheat germ, and flax seed mix with chopped prune and water for a quick and easy breakfast.
Strawberry and orange flavors will be sure to perk up your morning!
Sliced bananas are browned in bacon fat. The next time you fry up some bacon try this delicious little treat.
This nutritious recipe is a favourite of egg farmers Mark and Joanie Hamel of Watford. The vegetables can be varied to your preference.
Make your own pumpkin-spice latte-style treat from brewed coffee with this recipe.
Hash brown potatoes are baked in a creamy, bubbling casserole and topped with Parmesan cheese for a perfectly decadent side dish for any party.
These crepes are filled with scrambled egg whites, mushrooms, and shredded cheese for an impressive brunch item.  And they can be made ahead and refrigerated until needed--convenient for a large group!
Peaches, pecans, and a hint of cinnamon are baked into a sweetly delicious bread. It's perfect for brunches or summer get-togethers.
Sprinkle some cocoa powder into your morning oatmeal for a chocolatey, sweet start to the day.
Christmas Morning Breakfast Casserole is special enough for a holiday but so delicious and easy you might not want to wait.
Kids, adults, and monkeys all love this smoothie made with bananas and peanut butter.
Blend almond milk, oats, strawberries, and yogurt together to make this recipe for a fast and filling strawberry oatmeal breakfast smoothie.
Vegan zucchini and banana bread muffins made with applesauce and vegetable oil are a hearty and delicious way to start the day.
This easy biscuits and gravy recipe uses Italian sausage, creamy Alfredo sauce, and sage for a delicious brunch or weeknight dinner.
Homemade tomato juice cocktail is ready with just 5 ingredients and is a fraction of the cost of store-purchased versions.
Refried beans are layered with chorizo sausage with eggs and Mexican cheese creating a Mexican-inspired quiche perfect for breakfast or brunch.
Red velvet pancakes are a delicious breakfast treat and perfect for Valentine's Day.
Chicken, hash brown potatoes, and smoked Cheddar cheese are cooked together in a skillet creating a hearty chicken hash perfect for brunch or dinner.
Homemade wheat bread with a touch of sweetness is a hearty way to start the day. Top with butter and jam.
Try using cinnamon-raisin English muffins for this nutmeg-spiked French toast delight.  The many little air pockets will fill up with batter, and your toast will be tender and rich.  Dip the battered bread in sugar before frying, and serve with old-fashioned maple syrup.
I make this for breakfast/brunch the day after Easter. It's a great way to use up leftover dinner rolls and cooked vegetables. Everything bakes in one pan so assembling this dish is easy.  You can substitute spinach for the asparagus and add mozzarella cheese if you wish.
A delicious and slightly sweet yeasted bread made with carrots.
This bacon-and-egg pizza makes a terrific meal at any time of day!
Crisp and golden crepes filled with sausage, vegetables, eggs and topped with Hollandaise sauce.
This is not your ordinary French toast! It's deep fried and crispy! Top with butter, cinnamon sugar, maple syrup and bacon. Lick the plate clean!
Savory and delicious sausage and egg filled burritos.
Thin, rich omelets are wrapped around a crab and shrimp filling. A luscious Cheddar cheese sauce is draped overtop.
Green tea powder and soy milk make a great version of the traditional latte.
Irish potato griddle cakes, made from both baked potato and raw, grated potato, are pan fried until crisp and golden. Serve them with butter or honey.
Coffee-mocha smoothie, straight from the blender.
These sensational southwestern-style grits are baked with cheese, eggs, hot pepper sauce, and green chiles. Makes a terrific brunch treat.
Tender shrimp are cooked in a flavorful tomato sauce with green chiles, then layered with spicy, cheesy grits and baked for a Southern-style classic.
This simple recipe featuring zucchini and Monterey Jack cheese is a great way to use up overgrown zucchini.
A blend of spices flavor this adaptation of traditional South Indian dosas, a thin, crepe-like savory pancake.
Here's a flavorful zucchini bread with a pumpkin-like taste because the zucchini are pureed in a blender. 
Start your day sipping a delectable breakfast drink blended from fresh orange pieces, milk, chocolate syrup, and crushed ice.
This recipe is great for all those low-carb dieters.  I am in the first phase of a low-carb diet and was really missing my Frappucino's. This is an excellent substitute.
Quick cooking grits are enlivened with Parmesan cheese and prosciutto to get a big taste.
My dad used to make this recipe when I was a child. It was the only way I would eat seafood. Now that I've become a seafood lover, I really enjoy this one even more!  Good for special occasions since it has to be chilled overnight.
A quick morning snack made with milk, banana and malted milk powder.
A powdered chocolate, coffee and cream mixture that makes a great gift.
The crunchy goodness of nuts, grains and seeds is baked together with honey. Try this as a quick snack, as a cereal, or stirred together with your favorite flavor of yogurt.
This delicious breakfast casserole with hash browns, sausage, eggs, and cheese will become a weekend family favorite option for brunch.
Be a big shot at brunch with this casserole, which makes use of leftover buns or rolls for an easy, make-ahead crowd pleaser. A big bowl of fresh-cut fruit makes the perfect side dish.
Cinnamon, nutmeg, bananas, and pecans--everything you love about banana bread--make delicious additions to your morning oatmeal.
Bacon is baked in a Panasonic CIO and stuffed into pita bread with eggs, sausage, and tzatziki sauce to make this Greek-inspired breakfast.
Cream cheese and jam lurk between layers of custard-like French toast with a hint of vanilla and cinnamon. Breakfast or dessert? You decide.
Ricotta is the new yogurt! With blueberries, coconut, and almonds, this breakfast bowl is a treat that will keep you going all morning long.
Poached eggs made in the microwave is a very quick and easy way to poach eggs in about 5 minutes.
Sauteed zucchini is cooked with scrambled eggs for a quick and easy breakfast, especially in the summer when zucchini are in season.
Oats, brown sugar, and cinnamon are baked for 20 minutes in this quick and easy, crispy baked oatmeal recipe that is great for busy weekdays.
This cocoa, banana, and peanut butter smoothie is loaded with protein to keep you going on the morning or post-workout.
Serve up a batch of this quick and easy fry bread as a side dish or with jams, honey, or maple syrup for a decadent brunch treat.
Avocado, milk, and sugar are blended together in this creamy avocado milkshake that kids and adults love.
Flavored with gingerbread spices and rum extract, this French toast is a simple and delicious treat for holiday mornings.
This is a quick and easy recipe for a classic American breakfast, served in a tortilla with salsa on the side.
This chocolate pudding smoothie, made with avocado, banana, and berries, is a quick and easy breakfast for on-the-go eating.
Stale cinnamon rolls are transformed into a delicious French toast with bananas in this easy casserole dish.
Pan-fried potatoes and onions are topped with eggs, cherry tomato halves, and sliced steak for a hearty breakfast--or dinner!
Spinach, cheese, and egg white muffins are a great portable breakfast that are quick and easy to prepare for those busy weekday mornings.
Hot, crispy pizza dough topped with ricotta, bacon, and spinach is a unique choice for a savory breakfast cooked in a cast iron skillet.
A crispy, buttery crust surrounds the creamy and tender center of these Scottish oatcakes, Chef John's yummier alternative to ordinary brunch pancakes.
Breakfast in a glass never tasted so good! Keep a few frozen bananas on hand for a quick smoothie.
A batter filled with blueberries and blueberry yogurt will make these waffles a hit with berry lovers!
This recipe is perfect for anyone who has ever thought, 'I wish I could have nachos for breakfast.' Eggs are scrambled with tomatoes and onion before being scattered over tortilla chips.  Jalapenos and melted cheese top it all off for a spicy way to kick off the day. Buenos Dias!
Battered and fried bacon that is even better after cooking in the oven for 7 minutes. My husband and I saw the idea of fried bacon on the travel channel where they just battered and fried it and we decided to make it.  It was so good. But then we cooked in the oven and it was even better. Serve with white gravy and it is a heart attack waiting to happen but tastes so good!
An exciting Mexican-style scramble with lots of veggies and tortilla strips mixed right in! Serve with salsa on the side if desired.
A jumbled, filling breakfast created when I was camping in Montana. Originally the hot dogs were roasted over a fire while the potato pieces were foil wrapped and roasted in the embers and then added into a pan of beans. However, it works equally well when cooked in a kitchen! Serve with crusty bread on the side and fresh shredded cheese on top.
A quick bread that's moist and yummy for the tummy! Easy and tasty.
Yes, this is French toast, but a superior one. Unlike normal French toast this batter cooks into a custardy, crispy coating that leaves the bread creamy and oh so good. The use of good egg bread is a must here. Homemade is best, however store bought (such as Hawaiian bread) will work in a pinch.
A dollop each of molasses and brown sugar barely sweetens this light bread riddled with raisins and caraway seeds.  The bread machine makes short work of the preparation for you.
Red velvet waffles topped with a cream cheese glaze, whipped cream, and strawberries is a decadent treat for Valentine's Day breakfast.
Bananas and chocolate chips are folded into traditional pancake batter creating a sweet treat for weekend breakfast.
Leeks and potato are pan-fried and baked with eggs and mozzarella cheese creating a quick and easy frittata the whole family will love.
This gluten-free quiche Lorraine recipe uses almond meal in the crust for a rich and hearty brunch item without the gluten.
Bananas, pistachios, and milk are blended together creating a frothy banana juice delight.
Homemade honey granola sprinkled with almonds and golden raisins just like grandma used to make is a quick and easy breakfast treat.
Oatmeal prepared in a slow cooker could not be easier. This version uses apples, apple juice, and cinnamon for an apple pie flavor.
This is a paleo version of traditional pancakes.
This hearty almond butter and blueberry smoothie is packed with protein thanks to protein powder and chia seeds added to the mix.
French toast rolls made with a banana-cream cheese filling are a quick and easy, portable breakfast. Serve with whipped cream, syrup, or alone!
Make this creamed ham and eggs recipe for your next breakfast for a nice morning treat.
Cauliflower quiche made with a creamy white sauce and green onions is a bright yellow dish thanks to turmeric and curry added to the mix.
Quick and easy waffles flecked with strawberries are a colorful and tasty way to start weekdays or weekend mornings. Serve warm with maple syrup.
Chocolate pumpkin bread with a generous amount of chocolate chips is a holiday-favorite or treat any time of the year.
Spiced waffles made extra moist with the addition of applesauce are served with warm apple-pie filling and fresh whipped cream.
Use this baked oatmeal recipe as a base into which you can add your favorite toppings for a warm bowl of breakfast cereal.
Vanilla-flavored pancakes have a tempting topping of crunchy cinnamon sugar in this breakfast recipe inspired by the flavors of a creme brulee dessert. They're so light and sweet they don't need syrup.
Mushrooms and spinach are pan-fried with egg substitute and two cheeses for a light and tasty omelet.
This flourless, paleo-friendly pancake recipe is topped with pureed strawberries.
Use a stovetop grill to give shrimp a slightly smoky taste that's great in an easy version of shrimp and grits. Serve with a drizzle of barbeque sauce.
Tender, slow-cooked mushrooms and onion make this creamy, cheesy egg dish extra hearty for a special weekend breakfast.
Homemade pancake mix with oat flour, whole wheat flour, wheat germ, and buttermilk is great to have on hand. All you need is water and egg to make a delicious breakfast treat.
Keep plastic bags in your freezer filled with smoothie ingredients all ready to go. Just take one out, pour frozen plain yogurt and fruit into your blender, and hit the button.
Scrambled eggs with ham, garlic scapes, onion, and white Cheddar cheese make this a delicious egg dish for any meal.
Creamy eggs are poured over red potatoes and roasted red peppers in a skillet, then topped with goat cheese and finished under the broiler. A sprinkle of fresh basil gives this pretty dish extra flavor and color, so it's perfect for any special breakfast or for Christmas morning.
Tender crepes are stuffed with a sweet cheese filling made with cottage and farmers cheese. Use your blender to make the batter and the filling extra creamy. The rolled blintzes are then pan-fried until browned and hot.
The fiery taste of red pepper flakes meets the coolness of mint for a smoked salmon like no other.
This recipe calls for the bananas to be sliced, not mashed, so you'll get tasty morsels of banana throughout the bread!
A special grilled cheese breakfast sandwich, made with cinnamon buns, Cheddar and Brie cheeses, apples, and sliced ham, is dipped in egg and pan-fried until golden brown.
French toast topped with sweetened cream cheese, strawberries, and blueberries. Start your 4th of July with a red, white, and blue breakfast!
Finely chopped strawberries and whole blueberries add their fruity sweetness to pancakes that are easy enough for anyone to make.
Your choice of food coloring makes these waffles the breakfast of choice for a variety of holidays.
These crepe-like rolled pancakes, dusted with cinnamon sugar and served with orange segments, are a colorful variation on a South African dessert favorite.
Quinoa and flax seed get a cinnamon-flavored maple syrup coating before being lightly toasted in the oven. Sprinkle a few tablespoons onto your morning yogurt. 
These cornmeal pancakes can take the place of cornbread in any situation. Try it!
Tender eggy crepes are filled with sweetened cottage cheese, then rolled up and pan-fried until browned. 
For your next Irish brunch, make this 'French' toast Irish-style with a bit of whiskey and some Irish cream liqueur.  
Combine all the usual ingredients for pizza and top with eggs and potatoes for a cheesy breakfast pizza the whole family will love.
These quick waffles with a hint of maple and apple make a delicious weekend breakfast.
Spinach, ham, and mushrooms flavor this colorful and hearty egg bake that you start on the stovetop and finish up in the oven.
Sprinkle zucchini with a teaspoon of salt and allow it to drain in a colander for about 15 minutes for a drier quiche. Biscuit mix helps the eggs set.
Kids love these quick and easy pumpkin banana pancakes that can be tailored to the paleo diet by using almond flour instead of all-purpose flour.
Evaporated milk and egg help lend these sausage balls the right texture for moist and delicious breakfast sausage ball!
These paleo pancakes with two hits of coconut from coconut flour and coconut milk are perfect for a paleo, gluten-free, or anytime-breakfast.
These gluten-free pancakes are made with quinoa flour while retaining everything everyone loves about pancakes.
This Middle Eastern-style smoothie features avocado, honey, and almond milk.
Strawberry and banana bread get a little heartier with the addition of oats and whole wheat flour in this quick and tasty breakfast treat.
This breakfast strata is a the ultimate meat-lovers treat. With plenty of sausage, bacon, potatoes, and cheese, no one will leave hungry.
A quick-rising Irish soda bread is enriched by plump raisins and currants in this beloved family recipe.
Cheesy grits seasoned with rosemary are layered over ham and baked into a rich and creamy casserole perfect for holiday mornings.
Eggs are simmered in an herb-infused tomato sauce and served with grated Parmesan cheese for a quick and delicious lunch or light dinner.
Coconut chocolate chip waffles made with oat flour are a hearty way to start the day. Your whole family will love them!
This simple smoothie pairs strawberries and peanut butter with yogurt and milk.
My mother-in-law's recipe yields a puffy batch of these yummy pancake-like delights. You may want to top them off with fruit, jelly, syrup or powdered sugar.
Warm flour tortillas filled with eggs and sauteed vegetables.
A tasty but quick recipe for the cook who's in a hurry.
A savory pudding made with sliced white bread, eggs, Cheddar and Parmesan cheeses, and anything else you may want to chuck in!! This is a very nice light dish. Ideal as an evening meal, or even a breakfast with a difference! Optional: Add grilled chopped bacon, mushrooms, ham, tomato, or anything else you can think of!
An easy recipe that kids can help with.  I mix mild and hot sausage to make mine.
Toasted English muffins topped with Canadian bacon, eggs and creamy chicken soup.
This is an easy espresso drink to make with your home espresso machine--steamed milk and a shot of espresso with vanilla flavoring.
A very very yummy snack or breaky, very very very easy to make. Smear a little honey on each piece and enjoy!
White chocolate instant coffee mix adds a new twist to scrambled eggs.
I make this smoothie every morning for breakfast for me and my boyfriend. It's rich in vitamins, antioxidants, fiber, omega-3 fats, monounsaturated fats, soy protein, and so much more! (Use natural peanut butter to eliminate partially hydrogenated fats.)
These apple cinnamon waffles will fill your kitchen with wonderful smells as they cook!
Recreate maple and brown sugar oatmeal packets from scratch using this quick and easy recipe that beats store-bought oatmeal any day.
Breakfast sausages are rolled in bread, dipped in vanilla-cinnamon egg mixture, baked and served with cinnamon-sugar cream cheese and maple syrup.
Organic stevia sweetens this delicious combination of baby spinach, mango, grapes and fresh mint for a satisfying skinny smoothie.
For a protein-packed breakfast, make this quick and easy omelet that has mushrooms, green onions, and a generous helping of Cheddar cheese.
Quinoa frittatas with zucchini, rosemary, and cheese are quick, simple, and vegetarian. Have one for an on-the-go breakfast or as a side.
Prep these spiced oats at night, stick them in the fridge, and in the morning your breakfast is ready to eat before you head out the door.
Salmon is cured in a mixture of sugar and kosher salt for 48 hours in this easy-to-follow recipe for homemade lox that's a hit at any brunch.
Overnight oats and blueberries are blended together and topped with coconut and chia seeds in this colorful smoothie bowl recipe.
Baked oatmeal with apples, walnuts, and dried cranberries is a nice way to spice up plain oatmeal made on the stovetop.
Spice up your morning by adding jalapeno pepper to your green smoothie for a refreshing on-the-go breakfast.
Coconut oil and pecan flour are the star ingredients that make this vegan banana bread a moist and hearty alternative to the traditional recipe for banana bread.
Coconut flour replaces traditional all-purpose flour in this paleo sunflower banana bread recipe, perfect for on-the-go breakfasts.
Get paleo diet-friendly crepes using coconut flour, almond milk, and this recipe.
A favorite dish to eat during Lent, these Irish zucchini and potato pancakes are delicious with sour cream, applesauce, or even ranch dressing.
This recipe is protein-packed with quinoa and sunflower, sesame, chia, and flax seeds; lightly sweetened with coconut, honey, and applesauce.
Put a little extra spice in your Easter brunch with this recipe for an egg and sausage casserole with green chiles, salsa, jalapeno peppers, and cheese.
This coconut raspberry smoothie, with pecans, banana, and flax meal, is a hearty way to start the day and is paleo-friendly!
Sweet potato and banana pancakes made with coconut flour and almond flour are gluten-free, paleo-friendly, and will make your family very happy.
In this quick and easy recipe, oats are cooked in coconut milk for an exotic spin on classic breakfast oatmeal.
Whole oats, fresh blueberries, and walnuts make these easy homemade granola bars as healthy and filling as they are delicious.
Yogurt, goji berries, flax meal, and nuts are mixed together creating a superfood breakfast bowl to keep you energized until lunch.
This sweet and refreshing pina colada smoothie made with pineapple, coconut milk, and honey is a power-packed breakfast on the go.
Kefir gives these chocolate chip pancakes a light and fluffy texture, perfect for a satisfying breakfast that is quick and easy to make.
This quiche features custard made tender with heavy cream, delicately flavored leeks, and a hint of nutmeg, for possibly the best quiche ever.
A delicious breakfast quesadilla on flour tortillas featuring SPAM(R) with Bacon, eggs, Colby-Jack cheese, and salsa.  
Serve with your favorite toppings: Salsa, sour cream, pico de gallo, green onion, cilantro, sliced avocado.
With the versatility of a cake pop, these quick and easy mini pancakes are great on-the-go breakfast or for casual brunch entertaining.
These easy and delicious pancakes are made with almond flour, blended almondmilk and coconutmilk, maple syrup, and cinnamon for a new family favorite breakfast.
Corned beef hash, onions, and bell pepper are browned in a skillet, topped with eggs and chopped tomatoes, then broiled until just set.
Steel-cut oats and quinoa breakfast cereal with almond meal, flax, and cinnamon is a quick and easy vegan meal to start the day with.
You'd be surprised how little sugar goes into making this cocoa-licious chocolate granola that tastes like candy but is better for you than most granolas.
Steel-cut oats cook quickly in an Instant Pot(R) and are especially delicious in this apple pie version featuring fresh apple, cinnamon, and nutmeg.
Set aside 2 to 3 hours for freezing these chewy no-bake breakfast bars made of mashed banana, coconut flakes, almond butter, and oats flavored with milk chocolate drink mix.
Cauliflower, Cheddar cheese, and bacon bits come together in this low-carb, keto alternative to hash browns.
These quick and easy breakfast tacos with chorizo, potato hash, and eggs are ridiculously flavorful and the perfect meal any time of day.
A delightful alternative to breakfast burritos, these quesadillas consist of a satisfyingly crunchy crust filled with flavor-packed protein.
Ground pork in an omelet flavored with fish sauce. It smells good when it's cooked. Serve it with jasmine rice. You can have it anytime! If you like spicy, put in some chile sauce.
Hominy and bacon in a simmered milk gravy. A great accompaniment to eggs. An old old breakfast side dish served in logging camps and homes in the Pacific Northwest. My Grandmother, who was born in the late 1800s, told me her mother ate this as a child.
The Swiss and Cheddar cheese in this dish is an excellent combination. This is great for a brunch or holiday breakfast. My mother used to make this every year for Christmas brunch.
Satisfy your soul with pineapple, coconut, dried cherries, and a touch of rum, mon!
This delicious Indian-inspired omelet will certainly awaken your groggy tastebuds!
You may think that egg and cheese don't sound good atop a blueberry bagel. I didn't either, but if you'll be a good sport like I was and try it, you'll enjoy it as much as I do!
This is a very simple recipe (as are most smoothies) which is a great cool relief from a hot summer day. Banana, vanilla, and orange are delicious together.
These pancakes will satisfy all your craving necessities. Serve with powdered sugar and bacon!
It's easy to make a zesty shrimp ceviche appetizer when you used cooked shrimp and Bloody Mary drink mix. 
Gluten-free pancakes make with amaranth flour, ground almonds, cinnamon and honey.
A yummy combination of cornbread, onion, ham and cheese with 6 eggs baked into the top!
A truely unique sweet and savory omelet that features both peaches and bacon.
Leftover ham from the big dinner? Bought more eggs than your kids could boil and color? Open the fridge and throw together this pasta frittata: an easy one-pan dinner that's sure to please. Serve with heated spaghetti sauce on top, if desired.
Many people don't know how delicious sauteed apples can be. This recipes pairs them with sausages for a sweet and savory treat.
The whole family will love this easy to make breakfast pizza! You may vary the selection of vegetables to suit your taste. Possibilities are endless!
Adding crab meat makes this recipe a nice change of pace from your normal quiche.
A delicious cake like bread that has the added benefit of being very low in fat.
A delicious, molasses-cornmeal yeast bread gets gussied-up with blueberries.
All the ingredients for a Denver omelet are scrambled together and served in a tortilla with salsa for a quick on-the-go breakfast.
Mix shredded potatoes with eggs, onion, garlic powder, and a little salt and pepper to make these delicious potato pancakes.
Have leftover cranberries from Thanksgiving? Make cranberry apple oatmeal topped with walnuts the day after for a warm and hearty breakfast.
Celebrate Christmas morning with these quick and easy pancakes that are filled with pumpkin, white chocolate, and pecans.
Impress your family on Christmas or your mom on Mother's day with this make-ahead wine and cheese strata bubbling with eggs, cheese, and a hint of wine.
Enjoy savory crepes with these creamy chicken crepes topped with golden, bubbling Cheddar cheese.
This refrigerator raspberry oatmeal is assembled the night before so you can wake up to an already-made hearty breakfast.
Start your morning right with light and fluffy buttermilk pancakes featuring vanilla and nutmeg.
This grapefruit smoothie made with spinach and ginger is a refreshing and energizing way to start the day.
Green chile peppers and tortilla strips are cooked with eggs and Cheddar cheese creating a quick and easy, Mexican-inspired breakfast.
Whole wheat flour, agave nectar, coconut oil, and applesauce come together in this healthier version of lemon-zucchini bread.
Enjoy this easy Creole egg scramble loaded with tomatoes, mushrooms, and peppers for a quick and delicious breakfast.
French toast is made in a chocolate milk batter and topped with bananas and Nutella(R) for an extra breakfast or dessert treat.
Egg whites, vegetables, and pepperjack cheese are baked together in this quick and easy recipe for healthy quiche.
Add a new twist to regular pancakes by adding cooked squash, currants, and shallots to the batter. Top with sour cream for a savory breakfast treat.
A simple version of Irish soda bread with raisins is baked in a cast iron skillet. This is a vintage recipe handed down through the family.
Start a new tradition around your house by making these hearty whole-grain waffles on Wednesdays. You can mix the dry ingredients ahead of time to save a little time on waffle day.
Bursting with Mexican-inspired flavors, tortilla chips are quickly cooked with chopped onions and enchilada sauce, topped with fried eggs and shredded cheese, and broiled for just minutes until bubbly.
With Canadian bacon, red peppers and green onions, these crispy, cheesy potatoes beat the standard hash browns any morning.
This delicious mango and yogurt shake is great for extinguishing the fire in your mouth after eating hot curries!
These flavorful pancakes are served with a simple maple syrup and mixed berry topping and a dollop of vanilla yogurt. 
Cooked wild rice gives these fluffy pancakes a wonderful texture and hint of nutty flavor. Feel free to use more or less wild rice, depending on your preference.
These creative potato pancakes have ham and mozzarella cheese for a kicked-up version of the traditional potato pancake.
Cooking spray, egg whites, and chicken tenderloin meat make this version of egg foo young so light it almost floats away, and it's ready in only a few minutes. Eat this anytime -- it makes a great breakfast.
Garbanzo flour, oats, and cornmeal make these delicious wheat-free pancakes a hearty breakfast staple.
Use the leftover greens from dinner, such as Swiss chard, spinach, or kale, to make this lovely breakfast frittata.
Cardamom is used both in the body of the casserole and in the glaze to top it for a cardamom-accented breakfast treat.
Easy scrambled eggs get jazzed up with dill weed, bell pepper, onion, ham, and a touch of mayonnaise and half-and-half.
Fluffy pancake batter is poured into a special cast-iron Danish ebelskiver pan.
A beloved Chinese street food, Jian Bing are crepes folded around egg, green onions, and a crispy cracker or piece of fried dough.
This anise seed- and hazelnut-studded Christmas bread is made in the bread machine.
This delicious breakfast strata can be prepped and refrigerated up to 24 hours ahead of time, leaving you with time for your family or guests.
Try whole-grain brown rice for breakfast with this delicious frittata:  crisp bacon, scallions, and edamame.
Greek seasoning, Italian cheese blend, and pico de gallo give this breakfast casserole a variety of flavor influences from around the globe.
Whip up these hearty waffles with spelt flour, shredded apple, and cinnamon. You will be adding the recipe in your weekly rotation!
Soy milk and nutritional yeast are the base for this vegan French toast recipe that is quick and easy to prepare.
These easy mini quiches are perfect for brunch or breakfast on-the-go! Simple to put together, and packed with protein! You can have two of these for fewer than 200 calories!  Make them on the weekend and have breakfast ready all week long!
This French toast recipe uses vanilla and almond extracts to deliver a sweet and flavorful version of the breakfast favorite.
Warm up your fall mornings with a bowl of pumpkin pie oatmeal gently flavored with pumpkin puree, cinnamon, and ginger.
All the flavors and ingredients for oatmeal raisin cookies are paired with pancake batter, creating a hearty and delicious oatmeal raisin cookie pancake.
This simple recipe is a wonderful addition to your breakfast offerings. Add your own flair by customizing the filling!
Blend a medley of fresh vegetables, an orange, and chia seeds together in a Vitamix(R) or high-powered blender for a hearty salad smoothie.
Blueberries, coconut flour, and pumpkin puree are baked into tasty little blueberry bites that can fit into a paleo-friendly diet.
Scrambled eggs with bacon, tomato, avocado, and spinach also known as 'BLT eggs' are a creative way to enjoy the pleasures of the classic sandwich.
Coconut French toast is easy to assemble the night before and then just pop it in oven for 30 minutes the next morning for a tasty weekend breakfast.
This black and blueberry smoothie is a hearty and filling way to start the day thanks to chia seeds and coconut butter. Make in a NutriBullet(R) or blender!
Use refrigerated crescent roll dough to make these cream cheese and sausage-filled rolls. For immediate enjoyment or something to pull from the freezer throughout the week in your back-to-school routine.
This easy baked egg dish leaves plenty of room for creativity. Add green bell peppers or mushrooms to the ham, onion, and potatoes for an even more colorful meal.
Coconut milk, bananas, and mango are blended into a creamy tropical smoothie perfect for on-the-go breakfasts.
Bacon, eggs and hash browns topped with melty VELVEETA--it's everything you want for brunch in one delicious casserole.
A pizza of cheese and sausage gets the delicious addition of lightly baked eggs for a treat that may change the way you eat eggs and pizza forever.
Persimmons, coconut, and banana are blended together with the right amount of spices for a flavorful way to start your day.
Scalloped potatoes with ham, made with a creamy Alfredo sauce, will be the hit of the dinner party or a nice addition to Easter brunch.
Eggs, cheese, and crumbled vegetarian burger patties are baked in muffin cups for a breakfast item to grab and go.
Raisins in all their glory can stand alone in this white yeast bread, or you can add citrus zest to further seduce your taste buds. For variation, try prunes or nuts instead of raisins.
This is a wonderful breakfast cake that includes sausage. It's wonderful spices fill the air as you bake it making your house smell as good as it tastes! It's an 'in a hurry, out the door' morning food that you don't even mind giving the kid
A cheese and vegetable quiche that's great for breakfast, lunch or dinner.
An easy, old-fashioned sweet rye bread gets a punch of anise flavor.
A delicious savory tart made with ratatouille. This is a good way to use up leftover ratatouille in place of this vegetable mixture.
This unique quiche crust takes only minutes to make thanks to instant rice.
OOh's and Mmmm's before, during, and after eating this spiced bacon will become common place for your household. Every time I just suggest cooking this recipe, those sounds begin. My grandmother, my mother, and me cook this bacon for our family and friends, and it is always a favorite once it has been tried by one and all.
Tomato and egg served over rice is a Chinese staple. You can easily omit the pork to make this vegetarian.  This recipe is from my mom, who grew up in Guangzhou.
This is a delicious, subtly blended melange of flavors. This quiche is filling, satisfying, and oh-so-good!
A blend of bananas, peaches, honeydew melon, orange-flavored yogurt, and orange juice, this tasty smoothie is a terrific way to start your morning.
Crabmeat, two kinds of cheese, capers and sherry bake up in a delicious breakfast strata. You can substitute apple juice for the sherry if you like.
Liven up your brunch with these delicious, garlicky mushrooms in crispy buttery toast cups.
This smoothie featuring watermelon, cantaloupe, and honeydew is very refreshing on hot summer nights!
Potato bread farls are pan fried to make one of the essential components of an Ulster fry. They taste great on their own with a little salt, or with a fried egg on top.
Not to be eaten all the time, but man are they good. Good for a special breakfast or luncheon. Serve with fresh fruit, juice or a mimosa for something really special.
Crab and shrimp are layered with Swiss cheese and bread. This is a wonderful recipe that can be prepared ahead of time. Serve it for breakfast or brunch, or for dinner with a crisp green salad and lots of hot French bread.
Lithuanian recipe for potato pie made with potato, onion, butter and salt pork.
This recipe is used for smoked pork and bacon, and will work for Canadian bacon as well This bacon needs lots of smoke.
I came up with this because I had a ton of kiwi that was going to go bad soon and I couldn't find any decent recipes for kiwi so I settled on making my own smoothie. Well, it turned out I wasn't settling because it turned out fantastic, and I normally don't care for smoothies much. I used a bunch of different fruit, but kiwi is the main fruit here and the smoothie has a nice slightly tart, tangy, and sweet taste. I use soy milk, but non-fat milk would taste the same. I also used tangelos because that's what I had, but oranges or tangerines would work just as well.
These easy breakfast egg white muffins with light Cheddar offer a healthier take on spinach and cheese quiches.
These flourless baked oat bites topped with fresh fruit are a quick option for breakfast either at home or on the go.
Use up your leftover ingredients in this easy Western omelet-inspired quiche recipe full of pantry ingredients like eggs, Cheddar cheese, and ham.
Whip up this quick and easy mocha oat smoothie for an protein-packed breakfast that'll get you out the door fast.
Scrambling fresh eggs with crumbled goat cheese and fresh chives is a simple but delicious option for a farm-to-table breakfast or brunch.
These quick and easy waffles made with gluten-free rolled oats and almond milk are a great alternative to your morning bowl of oatmeal.
Start your morning off right with this smooth peanut buttery berry smoothie made with Stevia In The Raw.
Blueberries and almond extract are the star ingredients in these sweet and tart almond pancakes, a favorite for breakfast or brunch.
Prep these mango, honey, and chia seed oats at night and in the morning your breakfast is ready to eat--or to grab and go and eat at the office.
On a base of biscuits, this baked casserole has layers of corned beef hash with eggs, shredded cheese, and is topped with country gravy.
We're obsessed with this easy slow cooker breakfast recipe. Layer the ingredients overnight and wake to savory, breakfast perfection.
This baked oatmeal with cinnamon and nutmeg is a great way to use up leftover sweet potatoes, especially during the fall holiday season.
Eggs and cream mixed with broccoli florets, cooked quinoa, and Cheddar cheese and baked in muffins cups make a perfect brunch offering.
Deliciously filling skillet with a crisped potato base, veggies, a trio of meats, a sprinkling of Cheddar cheese topped with a perfectly fried egg.
Matcha green tea powder is blended with kale, coconut, banana, and white beans in this green smoothie with extra protein!
Chia seeds are mixed with banana, almond milk, and dates creating a tasty and sweet porridge that fits into the paleo and raw diet lifestyle.
Sweet potato hash browns with bacon are a nice alternative to traditional hash browns and fit into the paleo diet.
Maple syrup-sweetened apples, blueberries, and almonds, and just a sprinkle of cinnamon and nutmeg really dress up morning yogurt.
Drink this healthy and delicious oatmeal and strawberry smoothie for family breakfast or after a workout.
This berry smoothie uses steel cut oats for added heartiness, making a filling breakfast smoothie.
Bacon and asparagus omelette is topped with mozzarella cheese for a delicious and fresh breakfast for lazy Sunday mornings or a quick dinner for weeknights.
Papaya, fresh turmeric, fresh ginger, and almond milk are blended together in this supercharged smoothie.
Tomatoes, basil, and ricotta cheese are cooked with eggs in a mug in this quick and easy, Margherita mug eggs recipe.
Transform leftover summer squash into a sweet breakfast treat using this recipe for summer squash bread.
Bananas, peanut butter, milk, and cocoa powder come together in this kid-friendly healthy chocolate smoothie perfect for breakfast or a snack.
Whole wheat bread is dipped in a Parmesan cheese custard and pan-fried until golden in this quick and easy savory take on French toast.
Feeding a crowd for brunch? This bacon quiche with Potatoes O'Brien, Cheddar cheese, and sour cream is sure to be a hit.
Whole-grain waffles, served with a cinnamon drizzle and an icing drizzle, are like cinnamon rolls in waffle form.
Fresh carrot and apple juice with a hint of ginger is a refreshing and colorful way to start the day.
Gluten-free zucchini bread that tastes like regular zucchini bread is easy to make using this recipe.
Buttery, gluten-free crepes are served with whipped honey butter. Real butter makes the difference: the crepes are crisp and the topping creamy, all with a hint of orange for an indulgent dessert or brunch.
Pancake batter is flavored with ginger, cinnamon, and molasses in this recipe for an autumn brunch treat that tastes like gingerbread.
Overnight steel-cut oatmeal with pumpkin puree and pumpkin spice is a warm and comforting breakfast to make for cold winter mornings.
Colorful, delicious and packed with good-for-you ingredients. This recipe is so versatile--you can make it for breakfast, brunch, or enjoy it as a meatless main dish.
Enjoy all of your breakfast favorites in one quick and savory cupcake that includes toast, eggs, turkey bacon, and shredded Cheddar cheese.
Crescent roll dough is the crust in this egg casserole with turkey sausage, plenty of cheese, and veggies, great for breakfast or dinner.
Give your morning smoothie a caffeinated boost with fresh brewed coffee.
This tasty, golden brown casserole can be ready in less than one hour or you can make it the night before, chill and bake it in the morning. Choose lower fat cheese, milk and sausage for a lighter, yet still tasty version.
Ham and egg muffins with a touch of feta cheese are a quick and easy breakfast to eat on the run and can be made in advance and frozen.
In Chef John's brunch recipe, stale bread is transformed into a decadent French toast dish reminiscent of coconut cream pie. Garnish with mango slices, toasted coconut, and lime wedges.
Greek yogurt adds tang to this protein-rich peanut butter smoothie infused with chocolate drink mix.
Crispy on the outside and soft on the inside, these air-fried French toast sticks make a delicious breakfast!
This eggy, sweet French Toast is a great make ahead dish. Prepare the night before, and pop in the oven the next day.
This smoothie with Chocolate Almond Breeze almondmilk, bananas, and toasted almonds tastes similar to a chocolate-covered banana but is so much better for you!
Delicious, easy, and quick keto pancakes. Customize with your choice of toppings, like pecans, whipped cream, or blueberry jam.
Cut out most of the work and try Chef John's new and improved method for feather-light cheese souffles with a punch of intense cheese flavor.
The whole family will gather around when you pull this chocolate chip baked oatmeal, topped with fresh raspberries, out of the oven!
Cake flour gives these waffles great fluffy texture, while sour cream adds tangy tenderness to each bite. Serve with syrup and berries.
These quick scrambled eggs in the microwave are perfect for home or when you're on the road! They are light and fluffy, so everyone will love this quick energy bite to start the day.
Full of oats, bananas, applesauce, and walnuts, these nutritious low-sugar cookies are a good option for breakfast on the go.
Chef John's super easy and versatile souffls can be served as a savory side dish, for brunch with spiced maple syrup, or even as a dessert.
Frozen hash browns are repurposed into the crust of this family-friendly, easy-to-make breakfast pie.
A breakfast favorite (that's great any time of day!), these potato pancakes are made with ham and Cheddar cheese.
Here is a family favorite recipe that while it sounds strange is very tasty and has won over everyone who has tried it. It was born out of wartime in the Philippines we believe.  Typically served for breakfast with butter or margarine.  Not a sweet waffle.  Best in a standard waffle iron (not Belgian).
Blue cheese brings it's distinctive flavor to this delicious bread and egg dish.
This is a very old-fashioned recipe for yeast-raised cornmeal pancakes. It came to our family via my great grandmother and dates back to the mid 1870s.
Grits, cheese, and luncheon meat combine into a breakfast casserole that can be put together the night before.
Avocado and protein powder combine to create and unusual smoothie. The avocado gives it a nice, creamy body and a wonderful flavor!
This rum and vodka-spiked smoothie will knock you off your feet!
This potato bread makes 2 loaves and uses dry buttermilk powder and instant potato flakes for extra flavor.
Dutch recipe for bread with cinnamon.  You can take the crusts off, but you don't have to. Enjoy, or in Dutch: eet smakelijk!
A savory breakfast puff with Cheddar, Monterey Jack and cottage cheeses, flavored with green onions and chilies.
Small pancakes with cheddar cheese. Good with maple syrup or fruit, or on their own.
Molasses gives this wonderful oat bread a darker hue, joining cinnamon to enhance the musky sweetness of the raisins.  This recipe makes five loaves or scads of rolls, and, fortunately, they can be frozen.
This is a yeasted bread machine recipe with buttermilk and lots of oats for fiber and great taste.
This simpler version of Hunza Bread is a sweet, rich white bread adorned with golden raisins.
A wonderful non-dairy bread machine loaf which uses soy milk and soy flour instead of milk.
Buttermilk and potatoes in the batter make for a light and tangy-sweet donut puff.
This tomato and egg stir fry cooked in avocado oil is a quick and easy breakfast and falls nicely into the paleo lifestyle.
Gluten-free crepes made with rice flour, almond milk, and tapioca flour are just as good as traditional crepes. Fill with your favorite ingredients!
Move over corned beef hash! Leftover pulled pork and baked potatoes from yesterday's dinner become a quick and easy one-skillet breakfast today.
Pancakes with the flavor of cornbread are quick and easy to whip up, making them perfect for camping.
With hash brown potatoes, cream of chicken soup, and plenty of cheese, this creamy and comforting casserole is an easy way to use up leftover ham.
This tropical sunshine smoothie is loaded with banana, pineapple, and coconut water for a refreshing way to start the day.
Keep this smoothie recipe handy in preparation for a fast back-to-school breakfast option.
Kiwi, banana, pineapple, and orange juice are blended with coconut water and yogurt creating a creamy fruit smoothie perfect for summer breakfast.
Spinach artichoke quiche with a touch of bacon is a colorful and fancy dish to prepare for a special brunch or holiday.
This creamy strawberry and mango smoothie has a hint of mint added at the end of blending.
Why not use croissants when making French toast? The buttery goodness of the croissant makes this a decadent, crowd-pleasing breakfast or brunch!
A mango and cherry smoothie is a tangy and delicious breakfast drink or snack to cool down with on a sunny day.
Peaches, yogurt, and coconut milk are blended together creating a creamy and satisfying peach smoothie that is great for a post-workout boost.
Fresh corn kernels, crumbled bacon and sour cream bring delicious flavor to these quick deep-fried corn fritters.
Chef John's recipe for savory ricotta tart is a simple combination of great ricotta cheese and fresh herbs with just enough egg to hold it together.
A peanut butter and jelly sandwich is dipped in a raspberry liqueur-infused batter and pan-fried into a peanut butter and jelly French toast treat.
Whole wheat chocolate chip pancakes are a hearty version of the family-favorite breakfast treat.
This protein-packed breakfast smoothie with fruit gets you off to a great start.
Spinach and mushrooms pair with feta cheese and eggs to create this recipe for a more healthy and flavorful breakfast quiche.
Pancakes made with chunks of candied bacon and his favorite beer will put a smile on Dad's face.
Who wouldn't love to wake up to this baked pancake topped with Marzetti(R) Old Fashioned Caramel Dip, butter, cream and bananas?
Mark and Lisa Bastiaansen, egg farmers in Arkona, Ontario, enjoy this layered egg casserole at Christmas and other times during the year.
Sweet potatoes add their autumn flavor and color to a savory braided sausage roll with grapes, blue cheese, and rosemary. It's a pretty and festive brunch dish or light meal.
Dutch babies can be made grain-free with the use of chestnut flour, arrowroot, and coconut milk, creating a quick and easy breakfast dish.
This recipe for French toast casserole is topped with blueberries, pecans, and cream cheese.
Crab, egg, tomato, red bell pepper, and potato go very well together in this delightful dish. 
Forget the English muffins, Canadian bacon, poaching eggs, and harassing Hollandaise sauce.  This biscuit, egg, and andouille sausage breakfast topped with a simple Mornay sauce is terrific.
These vegan pancakes are much fluffier than any other recipe I've had. They are also very moist and delicious! My omnivore husband loves these!
This frittata is made primarily with egg whites and reduced-fat Cheddar cheese along with canned diced tomatoes with green chiles.
Don't leave the house without a hot breakfast. This simple concoction of rice cereal and apple with cinnamon and optional berries and nuts will stick to your ribs.
Diced chicken strips coated with buffalo wing sauce are hidden inside ranch-flavored mashed potato pancakes. Now you can enjoy the taste of buffalo wings for breakfast!
Mixing molasses and cream into New Orleans-style coffee with chicory makes for a delicious cup of coffee.
Brown sugar-sweetened sausage, fluffy scrambled eggs, and shredded cheese are baked with a crescent roll crust to make this family-pleasing breakfast breakfast bake.
Use seasoned biscuit baking mix, fresh asparagus, and diced ham to make an easy and savory breakfast or brunch casserole.
These crepes are made with raw buckwheat groats, egg, brown sugar, cinnamon, and salt.
Spicy turkey sausage with green peppers and mushrooms makes a tasty filling for a savory crustless pie made with biscuit mix. Great for brunch, lunch, or dinner.
Kaiserschmarrn, one of Austria's most famous desserts, is a lightly caramelized pancake with a sweet taste and fluffy texture. 
Serve latkes topped with applesauce.
This easy-to-make granola is perfect for colder months and will make your house smell amazing with toasty notes of pecans, sweet maple, and spicy cinnamon. Top it off with chopped dates for added sweetness.
Whole wheat flour and milled flax seed give this moist breakfast bread an added boost of whole grain.
Fresh kale and green grapes are blended into a refreshing green smoothie perfect for on-the-go.
Hearty pancakes dotted with fresh rhubarb and banana make this a breakfast your whole family will love.
Spelt flour, coconut milk, and coconut oil make these waffles a rich and hearty start to your day.
These vegan blueberry pancakes use spelt and oat flours as well as soy milk and flaxseed meal.
Fresh morel mushrooms add a gourmet touch to this rich ham and cheese quiche.
Layers of ham, eggs, cheese, and spices marinate overnight and are then baked the next morning for an easy omelet casserole. It is perfect for special occasions or Sunday brunch.
Eggs cooked with red onion, cremini mushroom, and baby spinach are folded over a layer of melted Stilton and mozzarella cheeses in this omelet recipe.
Tarragon adds a distinctive flavor to this veggie-loaded egg dish.
Make extra special eggnog pancakes during the holiday break for a fun, kid-friendly treat the whole family will love.
Kale, spinach, coconut, and almond milk are blended together, creating the best green juice that is quick to prepare.
Brown rice, garlic, spinach, eggs, sausage, and cheese are cooked up in a skillet to produce this delicious breakfast recipe.
Breakfast fried rice, made with eggs, bacon, and onion, will provide a hearty breakfast on a weekend morning.
This strawberry and cocoa smoothie is so delicious and easy to make that your mood will be immediately improved.
This kid-pleasing smoothie made with spinach, pineapple, raspberries, and blueberries is a great way to get greens into your diet.
Banana, pineapple, and coconut are blended with flax seeds and chia seeds for a tropical colada smoothie packed with protein.
Rosemary, bacon, and tomato frittata is a colorful and savory dish to serve on weekend mornings or for holiday brunches.
Let this recipe teach you a very easy way to turn delicatessen roast beef and Cheddar cheese into a delicious brunch-style egg frittata.
This beet and berry smoothie is a colorful drink packed with fruit and veggies for a hearty way to start your day.
Start your day off right with this recipe for a quick and easy green smoothie featuring spinach, avocado, apple, broccoli, and pineapple juice.
Eggs with flecks of pepperoni are topped with Romano cheese for a pizza-inspired version of eggs.
Everything is better with bacon, and this corn bread is no exception! Step your recipe up a notch with this new twist on a classic Southern snack.
Ovaltine(R) is the secret ingredient in this chocolate-covered strawberry smoothie that is perfect for breakfast or as an anytime snack!
Matcha green tea powder gives this mango and orange smoothie a bright green color for a refreshing way to start the day.
Start your day of right by putting a bacon-twist on your paleo pancakes, because everything's better with bacon!
This green smoothie with tomato, radishes, spirulina powder, and carrot is a savory way to start the day.
Substitute coconut flour for all-purpose flour to make gluten-free coconut crepes. Roll crepes around your favorite filling and sprinkle confectioners' sugar over the top!
Fish and Brewis with Scruncheons is a traditional salt cod and bacon dish from the Canadian provinces of Newfoundland and Labrador, delicious as all get-out.
Buttery zucchini quiche is baked atop refrigerated crescent roll dough for a quick and delicious dish perfect for breakfast or brunch.
Breakfast for breakfast or breakfast for dinner. Either way, these savory pancakes are filled with crumbled sausage and taste great with a drizzle of maple syrup.
Cabbage gives this peach and carrot smoothie a spicy kick sure to wake you up in the morning.
Crushed corn flake cereal adds an extra dose of crunch in this easy French toast. Transform leftover toast into a delightful breakfast treat.
This homemade cereal is slightly sweeter than the original, but just as addicting. Make a huge batch and store in an airtight container.
Zucchini and shallots are pan-fried with thyme-scented egg whites for a quick and easy frittata perfect for breakfast, lunch, or dinner.
This tasty cocoa mixture, when added to hot water, will provide you with a hot, spicy mocha coffee drink for pennies! It's a powder, making it simple to take along. To serve, stir 1/4 cup mix with 1 cup hot water and stir.
These pancakes are made with soy flour, giving a quick-bread breakfast option for those cutting down on wheat flour.
A tasty sugar-free and dairy-free version of banana bread is easy to prepare when using unsweetened almond milk and stevia powder. Fold pine nuts and flax seeds into the batter for extra protein and crunch!
Repurpose your waffle maker and wake up your mouth with this zesty recipe for Waffle Browns to start your day.
All the fixings for twice baked potatoes are layered casserole-style and baked into a decadent side dish for potlucks or brunches.
A crustless quiche combines salmon with asparagus, baked with plenty of Asiago and Cheddar cheeses.
Choose whatever kind of sausage you like--mild or spicy, pork or chicken--for these no knead fluffins.
Pineapple banana bread flecked with maraschino cherries is a sweet treat to serve at brunch or as a colorful dessert.
Freshly juiced mango, lemon, banana, and ginger create a tangy citrus drink to start the day.
This cucumber, orange, and carrot juice is a refreshing way to start the day and is ready in about 10 minutes.
Skillet fruit crisp is perfect for breakfast; pack it with apples, sliced almonds, and rolled oats to start your day off right.
Cornmeal and chia seeds add a little extra crunch in these crowd-pleasing, light waffles. Serve with your favorite toppings.
This pineapple smoothie with celery, cucumber, and lemon is a refreshing way to start the day.
A smoothie made with oranges, lemon, lime, and kiwi with a hint of honey is just the right amount of sweet and sour.
This recipe is dedicated to the memory of my Grandmother, who taught me to make it. It is a snack sure to please, and can be made in under 30 minutes.
This is another great holiday bread to make that belonged to my mother.  She sometimes served this one, and it is a very old recipe.  This bread is good the first day, but better the second. You may use dates instead of raisins if you wish.
This is not a super-sweet persimmon sweet bread, but a yummy moist raisin bread enhanced with persimmon pulp. Delicious!
A refreshing beverage made with orange juice, apricot nectar, and a splash of lemon.
These green-flecked egg cups use deli ham as a crust. They are delicious hot or cold and are a great lunchbox treat.
Have your classic mocha and white chocolate too! This recipe mixes white and regular chocolate to create a creamy, chocolaty treat for the coffee-drinker who loves chocolate too much to choose.
These oven-baked pancakes have fruit cocktail folded into the batter. Serve hot with maple syrup or fresh strawberries.
Orange and pineapple juices blend with orange sherbet to make a drink for all ages, perfect for a hot summer's day!
The Nepalese version of scrambled eggs: fried red onions, exotic spices and fresh coriander combined with fluffy scrambled eggs. Served on toast these eggs make a great breakfast treat.
This savory French toast recipe is a great breakfast or lunch. Served with ham and tomato chutney, these chive spiced baguette slices are fried until crispy and golden, and sure to be a hit.
My sister-in-law used to make this for breakfast, it has taste and zing, not bland like your regular scrambled eggs, and easy to prepare too.  Suitable for those who likes a bit of spice in their breakfast! Serve with toast and baked beans.
This cheesy egg and sausage casserole is assembled the night before, and baked in the morning.  It's the perfect breakfast when entertaining overnight guests. 
Masala tea is also known as chai, and this is an easy, authentic version of the drink, made from scratch with milk and spices.
Hash makes a fast brunch or even light supper dish. This variation is made with canned tuna, onion, and plenty of potatoes, and is seasoned with fresh dill, ketchup, and Dijon mustard.
Hash makes a fast brunch or even light supper dish. This variation is made with canned crab, onion, and plenty of potatoes, and is seasoned with fresh basil, Old Bay seasoning, ketchup, and Dijon mustard.
This orange-pecan quick bread is great at breakfast, or any time!
Anise extract and orange juice flavor these simple crepes. This is my grandma's recipe.  She used to cook this for her grandchildren in the morning when we would stay over night. They're yummy!!
This super green smoothie gets its sweetness from fresh fruit and a hint of honey from the almondmilk.
These yummy pancakes only use spelt flour and homemade buttermilk for a whole grain fluffy pancake that makes great breakfast or brunch fare.
Packed full of bacon, eggs, Cheddar, and hash browns, these breakfast burritos are wrapped in aluminum foil for easy freezing and reheating.
Mix oats, pumpkin puree, and maple syrup together in a jar, refrigerate overnight, and enjoy the easiest make-ahead breakfast ever.
Oeufs Cocottes with cream and smoked salmon are a delicious way to make eggs:. The eggs are baked in 2 stages in the oven so the yolks and whites are cooked to perfection.
Breakfast in a bun? Why not! This recipe has all the usual suspects  eggs, sausage, cheese  plus a little spice to kick your morning into high gear.
These simple 2-ingredient bites are filling, budget friendly and perfect finger food, also making a great breakfast or snack for on-the-go.
Puff pastry squares topped with corned beef hash, shredded cheese, and an egg are baked until browned and egg is just the way you like it.
Cloud eggs were originally invented in France (Oeufs a la Neige) centuries ago. They are very easy to make and will wow your guests for sure.
Crispy tots stand in for hash browns in this easy-to-make sheet-pan meal with a spicy kick from Cajun andouille sausage and jalapenos.
Ham, ricotta cheese, and Parmesan cheese make this savory Dutch baby pancake a satisfying crowd-pleaser at weekend brunch parties.
Made with eggs, sausage, and spinach in a transportable container, this quick and easy Mason jar meal is the perfect on-the-go breakfast.
Turmeric and mango add a bright color to this hearty, paleo-friendly smoothie that is quick and easy to prepare for on-the-go breakfasts.
Orange juice, goji berries, and fresh ginger are blended together in this quick and easy smoothie with the right amount of kick.
This one-dish brunch casserole is ideal for a crowd. Add a fruit salad and you can sit back and enjoy your company.
Cheddar cheese sandwiches are layered with ham, bacon, and eggs in this extravagant Grilled Cheese Brunch Bake sure to please a crowd.
A strawberry-pineapple smoothie is topped with blueberries, raspberries, almonds, and granola in this tasty berry smoothie bowl.
Oats, almond butter, coconut sugar, and hot water are mixed together in this oatmeal-in-a-jar recipe that is great for busy weekday mornings.
Rich buttery dough with eggs is mixed with bacon pieces and deep fried to puffy deliciousness in Chef John's Bacon and Egg Doughnuts.
Toss your leftover cooked pasta with eggs and cheese for a quick and easy crispy omelet; a filling hot breakfast ready in 15 minutes.
Blueberry summer squash bread is a different take on the traditional zucchini bread recipe and is a great way to use extra yellow squash.
Blueberry pancakes made with wheat flour, banana, and granola, are a hearty way to start the weekend mornings.
Kale quiche with a generous amount of Cheddar cheese and bacon is always a favorite among family and friends.
Mix miso, spinach, walnuts, and avocado into your oats for an Asian-inspired, savory version of oatmeal.
Wow the morning crowd with a cleverly delicious way to get savory bacon, hot cooked egg and toast in every bite.
This kiwi, banana, apple smoothie is made hearty with chia seeds and maca powder added to the mix for a quick and easy, on-the-go breakfast.
Zoodled squash is cooked with spinach and cilantro and topped with egg and mozzarella cheese for a quick and easy omelet.
Turmeric adds color and flavor to this smoothie made with orange juice, lime juice, and coconut milk.
Banana, chia seed, and blueberry pancakes are a hearty way to start the day with an extra boost of flavor from cocoa powder.
Egg bhurji, scrambled eggs seasoned with garam masala, turmeric, and coriander, is an Indian-inspired way to eat eggs for breakfast.
Fry kimchi and eggs together in a bit of oil and get a breakfast item that transcends the sum of its parts. Trust us!
Quick and easy baked oatmeal with berries, chia seeds, and oat bran will keep you full and energized until lunchtime.
Kale and smoked salmon frittata with potatoes and feta cheese is always a crowd-pleaser at brunch or serve with a side salad for dinner.
This recipe, inspired by Starbucks Green Tea Frappuccino(R), blends matcha green tea powder, milk, vanilla syrup, and ice for a delicious cold drink.
Almond milk, banana, and cocoa powder are blended with ice creating a "skinny" almond milk shake that the whole family will love.
Need to use up your extra ham from your holiday meal? Make a ham and bacon hash!
Zucchini bread is the "crust" in this zucchini bread breakfast pizza layered with Greek yogurt, fruit, and maple syrup.
Blend chocolate protein powder, almond milk, coffee, and banana together for a smoothie that will jump-start your day!
Cottage cheese is the secret ingredient in these quick and easy, skinny pancakes that the whole family will love; top with fresh fruit!
This banana, orange, and ginger smoothie is quick and easy to prepare and is an energizing, on-the-go breakfast drink.
Homemade rustic bread for breakfast, lunch, or dinner is easy to make using only 5 ingredients that you probably already have on hand.
A green smoothie is topped with berries, chia seeds, granola, and coconut in this colorful and hearty green smoothie bowl.
Almond flour, eggs, and cream cooked in the microwave make these pancakes soft and moist without the need for wheat flour.
Cucumber, chia, ginger, and banana come together in this refreshing green smoothie that is quick and easy to prepare.
This cinnamon and vanilla-scented smoothie will make you feel like you are biting into an apple-pie-flavored donut and is paleo friendly!
This smooth and creamy carrot and banana smoothie bowl is topped with flaked coconut and goji berries for a quick and easy vegan breakfast.
Start your day with this less than 100-calorie treat made from fresh fruit and topped with creamy Reddi-wip.
Who knew that a humble staple like a can of tuna could be transformed into such a snazzy lunch or brunch?  The Asian flavor is subtle, making the fresh albacore tuna the star!
This quick and easy recipe for the tasty Persian dish isfanakh patera, or spinach pancake, is made with fresh spinach, parsley, and scallions.
This creamy, mocha-flavored blend of banana, almond milk, spinach, and vanilla protein powder is a unique way to enjoy your morning coffee.
This omelet, made with asparagus, green pepper, ham steak, and Provolone cheese, is a unique twist on breakfast and great for the keto diet.
Perfect for a twist on the classic Sunday brunch, these quick and easy waffles are made with hash browns, eggs, and spicy sriracha sauce.
These easy 6-ingredient cookies made with mashed bananas, oats, and peanut butter are a quick, filling option for breakfast on the go.
This simple yet tasty granola is sweetened with honey instead of sugar and features shredded coconut, cinnamon, and chopped pecans.
Roasted potatoes are seasoned with fresh herbs and topped with Parmesan cheese in this Italian-inspired recipe that is a great side dish.
All the delicious warm spices of banana bread are added to these easy-to-prepare overnight oats. Bananas are stirred in for banana bread flavour in a jiffy.
What's better than pancakes for breakfast? Monster cookie-inspired pancakes! This recipe has peanut butter and 2 kinds of chocolate treats.
With only eggs and Mexican-style chorizo, these quick and easy scrambled eggs work well when you're looking for a no-cheese breakfast dish.
Breakfast is a welcome treat when it's overnight oats with almond butter, bananas, chocolate, and chia seeds.
With all of your breakfast favorites like pancakes and maple syrup, eggs and sausage, this easy breakfast casserole is ideal for entertaining or just a lazy weekend morning at home.
Steak fries are topped with chunks of grilled carne asada, a spicy diced tomato mixture, fried eggs, and guacamole.
Slice into this springtime sweet bread of juicy rhubarb layered with a toasty cinnamon-pecan crumble; enjoy with coffee for the perfect breakfast!
These low-carb pancakes are made with coconut flour, coconut oil, and Greek yogurt and sweetened with stevia. You can make them in a skillet or a waffle iron!
Get a head start on breakfast and prep this French toast ahead of time to let the fragrant blueberry and maple syrup flavors mingle overnight.
Blend fresh mixed berries and Vanilla Almond Breeze together to make this tangy, refreshing smoothie.
Make this crispy, smoky sweet potato-bacon hash in your air fryer for a quick, new breakfast or brunch idea.
An egg-and-a-half encircled by onion, green bell pepper, and ham, then topped with melted Cheddar cheese is a great breakfast served with your favorite toast.
A quick and easy breakfast, syrniki are traditional Russian cheese pancakes that use quark or tvorog (farmer's) cheese for extra creaminess.
This crispy, crunchy, sugar-free granola does not have any added sugar or sugar substitutes and is a perfectly healthy morning breakfast.
If you're expecting company for brunch, cook up this recipe for gourmet avocado toast with crumbled crispy pancetta and poached egg on rye.
This may be the best breakfast recipe ever! Try this cheesy breakfast burrito the next time your in-laws are visiting.
Scramble grated zucchini and Parmesan cheese with eggs for a tasty, effortless keto hash, perfect as a side dish.
A hearty sausage hash, filled with flavor - a great way to start the day!
This recipe is a traditional Easter time classic in Cape Town, South Africa. It is served mainly with hot cross buns or freshly baked bread.
This is a refreshing combination of peaches, apple, and lime blended with mint.
This is a great dairy-free smoothie for the true mango lover!
Cream cheese and yogurt combine to make this the most delicate, creamiest papaya smoothie ever. It is very refreshing and tasty!
Lime and strawberry sorbets are blended with lime and orange juices, strawberries, and ice to make a cold and refreshing beverage.
Hard-boiled eggs are deep fried and then simmered in a sauce made with red chile peppers, tomatoes, garlic, and shrimp paste to make this unique Indonesian dish.
Using ready-made eggnog from the dairy case means no eggs to cook for this spirited, coffee flavored holiday cup.  
Crab meat is baked in a seasoned egg base then baked until browned and puffy for an impressive brunch or light summer main dish.
Artichoke hearts and olives lend themselves to this exciting variation on a brunch favorite!
I modified my grandmother's bran bread recipe and got this one. I was out of bran, so tried frosted wheat cereal. The results were great!
Grilled sliced egg bread soaked in whipped free-range chicken eggs with Grande Marnier and fresh nutmeg and stuffed with fresh mascarpone cheese and Chambord Blueberry Preserves. Garnish with fresh strawberry. Serve with butter and warm syrup.
This recipe is for those who enjoy baking and spending some time in the kitchen creating wonderful palate pleasing delights for those whose company we enjoy! So go on and give it a try, make someone's day by giving them brunch in bed!
This recipe was my grandmother's.  The breads are baked in coffee cans!
Spinach, eggs and matzo are mixed with salt, pepper and a dash of freshly ground nutmeg, and cooked in a skillet to make a stunningly simple open-faced omelette.
 We think any morning would be just fine to serve this tasty frittata. Scallions, ginger, soy sauce and garlic spice up the cooked eggs. Then, bean sprouts and sesame seeds top off the egg mixture, and the skillet is put in the oven to bake. Just before s
These crepes are made with egg whites, cream, sugar, flour and melted butter.
Rye bread, sauteed onions and bacon slices are baked in a rich savory custard.
Butternut squash porridge made with coconut milk, cinnamon, and walnuts is a tasty way to start the day, especially if following the paleo diet.
A delicious twist on French toast with a yummy cream cheese filling.
This on-the-go breakfast smoothie is supercharged with strawberries, blueberries, clementines, avocado, apple, oats, and almond milk.
Enjoy the Western Denver, a mixture of eggs, peppers, and onion, on its own as an omelet, or between two slices of bread as a Denver sandwich.
Milk, orange juice, strawberries, mango, peach, and pineapple combine to make this delightful smoothie that has a little tang with dash of sweet.
Use canned pumpkin puree, frozen banana, and Greek-style yogurt to make this quick breakfast smoothie.
Homemade crepes rolled around a cheesy seafood filling are baked under a creamy sauce creates delightful seafood crepes perfect for brunch.
Scrambled eggs with shrimp and cocktail sauce is a quick and easy breakfast that comes together for a sweet and savory meal.
Bacon strips surround egg topped with Cheddar cheese in this delightfully simple idea for hand-held breakfast items.
Syrniki, also known as fried quark cheese patties, are a traditional Russian breakfast item or dessert. Serve with jam or sour cream.
Ham, cheese, and hard-boiled eggs are baked with elbow macaroni creating a rich and creamy casserole perfect for brunches or holidays.
This quick and easy dish made with eggs, diced tomatoes, pepper jack cheese, and honey ham is sure to please your Father's Day guest of honor.
Raw egg, milk, cinnamon, sugar, and vanilla blend for a protein-packed and slightly sweet morning beverage, perfect for your back-to-school routine.
An omelet loaded with potatoes, ham, and Cheddar cheese is a delicious way to start the weekend.
Spice up your morning smoothie by adding fresh ginger, an orange, and carrots to your blender for a colorful on-the-go breakfast.
Skip your morning coffee in favor of this delicious smoothie made with spinach, pineapple, kiwi, and almond milk.
The name says it all in this pink flamingo yogurt smoothie. Strawberries, mango, and yogurt are blended into a bright pink drink for a quick on-the-go meal.
Whole wheat waffles with a homemade blackberry sauce are a hearty and filling way to start the day.
Cheesy hash brown casserole made with cream of celery soup and sour cream is the ultimate comfort food for your brunch plate.
This frittata recipe is packed with zucchini and onion for a easy and versatile baked egg dish.
This tropical, non-dairy smoothie, full of protein and fresh fruit is not only a wonderful way to start your day, but can be enjoyed anytime as a refreshing summer drink.
Corn and oatmeal waffles are a wheat- and dairy-free version of waffles that are so flavorful no sweetener is needed!
Acorn squash waffles with plenty of flavor from cinnamon, cloves, and ginger are the perfect fall breakfast for the whole family.
Gluten-free pumpkin bread topped with a cream cheese icing is easy to prepare using gluten-free all-purpose flour and baking mix.
This is an alternative to sweet quinoa breakfast cereals, delivering a savory treat with asparagus, goat cheese, and sage.
This egg burrito gets interesting when avocado and cream cheese are added to the mix. It's a great quick and easy meal.
Breakfast is delicious when it includes this quick and easy recipe for corn fritter pancakes.
Spinach, sun-dried tomato, and feta cheese are scrambled with eggs and wrapped in a warm tortilla to produce this delicious breakfast wrap.
Applesauce sweetens this classic Dutch Baby (puffed pancake). Spread with a bit of melted butter, dusted with confectioners' sugar, and topped with streusel for a delicious brunch offering.
This quick and easy fried matzoh combines soaked matzoh meal with eggs for a delicious breakfast.
Applesauce and pure maple syrup sweeten this granola made with dried cherries, pumpkin and sunflower seeds, and wheat germ.
Farro, also known as emmer wheat, is a whole grain that can be cooked in many different ways. Simmer it with milk and a vanilla bean for a sweet start to the day.
This breakfast cookie is packed with grains and seeds to help give a quick boost you can just grab and go!
Make a savory version of monkey bread with sausage, pepperjack cheese, and biscuit dough for holiday brunches.
Use the Swiss chard (or what have you) from your CSA box in this quiche recipe.
Shredded coconut, macadamia nuts, and pineapple give this banana bread a Hawaiian twist. It is perfect for brunches or alongside a cup of coffee.
Green tea powder, low-fat soy milk, and low-fat yogurt blend for a tasty smoothie.
A hearty fresh pasta dish with a touch of elegance combines eggs, bacon, sausage, and Parmesan cheese. Perfect for a special breakfast for two or Father's Day.
A pack of frozen dinner rolls turns into a warm and sticky brunch favorite with butterscotch pudding, pecans, and brown sugar.
Go for a savory baked pancake by adding bacon to the batter using this recipe. You can always add syrup after it's done baking.
Refrigerated pizza dough is rolled around mozzarella cheese and sausage and baked into a golden brown ring perfect for potluck or brunches.
Bananas and coconut milk make this vanilla ice cream smoothie extra yummy.
Ham and Swiss cheese sandwiches are baked in a seasoned egg batter creating a breakfast casserole perfect for weekend mornings.
Egg farmers Larry and Jane Rundle from Woodham, Ontario, enjoy this recipe on Christmas morning and it can be prepared the night before.
This omelette, filled with ham, sour cream, and Dijon mustard, makes a filling breakfast or satisfying supper.
A fluffy 'Dutch baby' casserole is ready in less than 30 minutes by cooking in the microwave for a quick and easy brunch dish.
Mini quiches filled with Swiss cheese, bacon, and herbs are the perfect appetizer for dinner parties or brunches.
This recipe is both eggless and dairy-free, yielding pancakes with similarities to both cornmeal cakes and crepes.
Golden brown fresh scrapple on lightly toasted bread makes a great breakfast sandwich.
Saffron, paprika, and parsley flavor this Israeli dish of tomatoes, bell pepper, onion, and fried eggs. Serve hot with tahini sauce and pita bread.
These Icelandic pancakes hold to the motto, 'You can never be too rich or too thin.' The crepe-like pancakes, enriched with sour cream, eggs, and melted butter, are traditionally sprinkled with brown and confectioners' sugar and rolled up.
An omelet stuffed with bacon, turkey, tomato, and cheese is served topped with prepared hollandaise sauce in this quick brunch or lunch dish.
Hot coffee is blended with a banana and protein powder and served over ice. This rich and filling breakfast drink is perfect for mornings on the go!
A vintage banana bread recipe has been handed down through the family, and now the secret is out. It's made with butter, not oil, and there's a bit of vinegar in it.
Here's a delicious way to use those Easter leftovers of hard-cooked eggs and ham. A Cheddar cheese sauce enfolds diced eggs, ham, and sliced mushrooms, and the sauce is served hot over toasted English muffins.
Simple scrambled eggs get a Spanish-style upgrade, with leeks, potatoes, and fresh shrimp. Done in just a few minutes, this easy recipe is great for brunch, lunch, or a light supper. The yellow eggs, pale green leeks, and pink shrimp look pretty, too.
Swiss chard, seasonal fresh herbs, and fresh mozzarella cheese make up a fresh baked quiche stuffing for a big zucchini from your garden. There's a browned crumb topping, too.
This yeasted snack bread combines chai mix flavors along with frozen raspberries, walnuts, rye flour, and caraway seed for a unique combination.  
These ham, egg and cheese bites are perfect for breakfast on the go.
At Christmas time, panettone becomes available at many gourmet stores.  This is a very tasty idea for a nice Sunday brunch.
The combination of herbs, bacon grease, and cool onion sauce make this a sophisticated waffle!
Orange zest is added to cottage cheese and rolled up in a thin pancake.
A gourmet quiche's flaky homemade crust encloses rich crabmeat and mushrooms. There's a golden layer of Italian cheese on top.
This easy steel-cut oatmeal recipe with banana, flax, cocoa, and cinnamon is a great breakfast comfort food!
Start your morning right with a delicious, protein-packed fruit smoothie. Add your favorite seasonal fruits for tasty variations!
Grated carrots add a touch of sweetness and a splash of color to these tasty pancakes. Top with applesauce or sour cream if desired.
Make a hearty breakfast by adding an egg, applesauce, and blackberry yogurt to your morning oatmeal.
Make your own personalized instant oatmeal packets for a quick and hearty ready-made breakfast. The kids can help make the packets, and eat them too!
At 611 Supreme in Seattle, authentic Normandy-style buckwheat crepes are filled with either savory or sweet fillings. Let the batter rest overnight before making the crepes.
Make a big bowl of oats, blueberries, and peanut butter with this recipe.
Shrimp and grits get the gourmet treatment in this flavorful combination of creamy, flavorful grits, Dijon-flavored shrimp, and maple bacon, served with toast points. This is a perfect holiday breakfast or special meal for guests.
Savory cheesy grits are served with rich, sweet king crab meat in this deluxe version of low country seafood with grits.
A few gourmet ingredients, including dry sherry and goat cheese, lift this colorful dish of shrimp served with cheesy grits to a new level. Serve it for a special occasion or a fancy brunch.
Banana-nut pancakes are topped with yogurt and sliced berries then folded in half for a special breakfast or brunch treat.
This sweet potato and banana smoothie, made with cottage cheese, milk, and cocoa powder, is a hearty way to start the day and will keep you full until lunch.
Banana, pineapple, and coconut juice are blended together creating a pina colada-flavored smoothie for a tropical start to your day.
A delicious cake that combines flavors that everyone loves--chocolate and orange.
Oven-baked pancakes are perfect for a lazy weekend breakfast. This recipe uses pumpkin pie spice in a tribute to autumn flavors.
Savory gluten-free muffins, loaded with bacon, spinach, and cheese, are a portable breakfast item perfect for on-the-go eating.
Rosemary-scented sweet potato quiche is a delightful vegetarian dish with goat cheese, Monterey Jack cheese, and caramelized onions for a rich and flavorful brunch item.
Cheese sauce, potatoes, eggs, and Mexican cheese blend are layered on pizza dough and baked into a filling Mexican-inspired breakfast pizza.
This kid-pleasing power smoothie made with strawberries, blueberries, blackberries, and raspberries is sure to become your go-to smoothie of choice.
An asparagus and mushroom frittata is a quick and easy dish to prepare for breakfast, brunch, or dinner.
This lightly sweet granola with almonds, raisins, and coconut makes the perfect topping for yogurt or even ice cream. Whole grain buckwheat gives it an extra crunch.
Scrambled eggs with Cheddar cheese get an extra boost of color when bell peppers, black beans, and tomatoes are added to the mix.
No one will know that this delicious strawberry-banana smoothie is packed with protein, and it's all thanks to the secret ingredient: tofu!
Start a new holiday tradition by making this scrambled egg breakfast casserole on Christmas morning.
Crepes are loaded with protein thanks to the addition of egg whites, milk, and Greek yogurt and are a quick and easy breakfast that will keep you full until lunchtime.
Savory crepes with a delicious crab filling are the perfect dish on a spring or summer evening.
Experience the warm flavors of fall any time of the year with this pumpkin-apple pie smoothie. Top with crushed graham crackers, pecans, granola, or whipped cream if desired.
A dressed-up version of French toast has the sweet tropical flavor of pineapple and a topping of hot fudge sauce for a decadent dessert..
Thin savory pancakes are perfect for wrapping veggies, ham, and cheese for an on-the-go breakfast wrap.
This quiche-like dish featuring zucchini, bacon, and mushrooms is great for a light lunch or brunch.
Authentic Mexican stuffed peppers start as fresh poblano peppers, roasted in the oven, skinned, and stuffed with cotija cheese. Floured and dipped in egg, the peppers are fried to tasty golden brown.
Raspberry yogurt gives this bread machine bread recipe added flavor and moisture that everyone in the family will love.
Everyone will want the recipe when they taste this yummy granola loaded with nuts and sweetened with maple syrup and honey.
You don't have to be gluten-free to enjoy a delicious broccoli and mushroom quiche made with a quinoa crust.
Apple cider pancakes made with powdered milk and cinnamon are a surprisingly yummy way to start your day. Serve with your favorite toppings.
These world famous pumpkin pancakes are perfectly moist thanks to pumpkin puree and cottage cheese in the batter. Prepare on cold fall weekends.
Apples, vanilla protein powder, and banana are blended together into a tasty smoothie to have during apple season.
Banana, peanut butter, yogurt, and strawberries are blended together in this pumpkin smoothie for a taste of autumn to start your day.
Combine strawberries, Greek-style yogurt, and orange juice to make this filling strawberry breakfast smoothie.
Quinoa crepes made with quinoa flour, almond milk, and a hint of honey are a gluten-free way to start the day. Fill with your favorite fixings!
Sardines are simmered with onion and tomato and served over white rice for an Island-style meal perfect as breakfast with a cup of coffee.
Amaranth pancakes are a dairy- and gluten-free version of pancakes that get an extra crunch from the amaranth for a memorably delicious breakfast.
This is a gingered wheat bread, sweet and hearty with wheat germ and raisins.  The bread machine does all the kneading for this simple recipe.
Sweet, little rounds of pumpkin bread dough are fried in a skillet to puff up crisp and delicious.  It 's a novel way to enjoy everyone's favorite squash.
This moist, dense, yeast-free bread uses graham flour, a whole wheat grind that includes the bran for flavor and health.  Here, it combines with all-purpose flour, molasses and buttermilk to steam over boiling water on the stove.
Dotted with raisins, candied cherries, nuts and citron, this spicy, sweet yeast bread makes a pretty holiday party offering.
Chewy breakfast bars are easy to make, with just a few ingredients and short cooking time!
Delicious and easy to make.  A definite crowd pleaser, and there are many variations by using different vegetables, including broccoli, cauliflower and mushrooms. Season with your choice of spices.
Salmon isn't usually fried for breakfast, but if prepared this way, it can be a great bacon substitute that will help you incorporate more fish into your diet.
Easy, inexpensive, and tasty. A savory moist alternative to pasta or potatoes, great as a side with grilled meat or poultry, or a main course with a side of greens. A great way to use stale bread (save in the freezer - mix and match, even bagels, but nothing sweet for this recipe!)
Cornmeal is simmered in a thick pudding sweetened with maple syrup. I'm not sure where this recipe came from, my mother would make it for us before school on cold winter days.
A delicious and refreshing drink. The combination of the ice cream and the champagne is very addictive.
This is my dad's version of scones.  It is a dough like cinnamon roll dough and it is fried in hot oil. Very good Sunday treat. Served with honey, jam or sprinkled with powdered sugar
This not-too-sweet pumpkin seed granola is sugarless, sweetened only with sugar-free, maple-flavored syrup. A great alternative for special diets!
Make Christmas morning easy and delicious with this slow cooker apple oatmeal recipe that happens overnight: top with blueberries, raspberries, strawberries, granola, raisins, or walnuts.
Almond Breeze almondmilk and oats make a great no-cook oatmeal. Change it up during the week with fun flavor iterations.
With avocado, oats, and a chocolaty bang, these high-protein breakfast cookies will power you through the morning.
Chocolate chips and dried cherries are a match made in heaven in these lightly sweetened yeast bread loaves.
Soak oats overnight with warm spices, molasses, flax, and Greek yogurt to make these gingerbread overnight oats, a tangy breakfast perfect for cold months.
A quick and easy dish to serve as a main course or side, this spinach and cottage cheese pie also works great for breakfast or brunch with its egg base.
In a hurry and don't have time to make breakfast? These little strawberry-banana freezer oatmeal cups are ideal for a quick yet yummy breakfast.
Please a crowd with this mouth-watering strata that pairs well with Chateau Ste. Michelle wines.
Spinach and poached eggs are served atop tender portobello mushroom caps and blanketed with a reduced-fat 'Hollandaise' in this low-carb rendition of eggs Benedict.
Your family will think you worked all day on this deceptively easy spinach quiche that uses pre-made pie crusts.
This easy-to-make breakfast pita pizza is always a crowd pleaser, from the pickiest kid to the hungriest parent. It's fun to construct, quick to bake, and the sausage is the star.
Banana and egg pancakes have to be the quickest and easiest gluten-free, vegan breakfast and the smartest way to use up extra-ripe bananas.
There's no better way to start the day than with these delicious vegan banana pancakes for two, served with maple syrup and fresh berries.
This easy vegan French toast recipe, made with soy milk, sugar, and cinnamon, is dairy-free deliciousness on your breakfast or brunch table.
Follow this quick and easy pressure cooker recipe that is ideal when you have to make loads of eggs in a very short time!
Greek yogurt and 2 cups of mashed bananas add plenty of moisture to this delicious banana bread studded with chocolate chips and chopped walnuts.
A delicious breakfast with avocado and egg for 1 that is ready in a few minutes works with the keto diet and will keep you full for a few hours.
The sweetness from the sweet potatoes is the perfect complement to the spicy chorizo inside these make-ahead breakfast burritos.
Frittata is a great brunch or breakfast dish or a quick dinner option with a salad. Asparagus is especially tasty, but other vegetables can be substituted.
This is a foolproof gluten-free bread that is so easy you'll bake it on a daily basis. There's no kneading required, and it is dairy-free to boot.
This bread pudding made with smoked sausage, cheddar, parsley, and sweet pepper is assembled ahead of time, deepening the flavors overnight and ensuring easy baking the next day.
These waffles are truly the best waffles you'll ever eat - made with eggs, butter, and cream, they are rich and crisp. Serve with fresh fruit, maple syrup, or confectioners' sugar.
Oeufs cocotte are French baked eggs where the eggs are cooked in the oven in a water bath . This version is made with ham, cheese, and cream.
Looking for an easy yet delicious dinner? Spinach, green onions, garlic, and Gouda cheese combine to make the perfect quick and easy dinner.
Make quick steel-cut oats in an Instant Pot(R) as a simple and nutritious base for your favorite breakfast toppings.
Seasoned strips of flank steak, onions, potatoes, bell pepper, and jalapeno pepper make a hearty breakfast burrito.
Take your oatmeal to the next level by making it with freshly brewed coffee instead of water and adding cocoa powder for a chocolate twist.
Banana, dark chocolate, and almond milk are blended together in this vegan, dairy-free smoothie that is a great on-the-go snack for energy.
Oats, quinoa, flax meal, almond meal, and walnuts are simmered with apples and raisins in this quick, easy, and hearty gluten-free porridge.
Breakfast oatmeal gets a carrot cake makeover in this microwaved version made with carrot, pineapple, cinnamon, ginger, and walnuts.
Try this French toast recipe for a special holiday twist on a breakfast classic.
This red onion and zucchini frittata is topped with fresh mozzarella cheese pearls and sun-dried tomatoes and finished under the broiler.
The classic egg in a basket (or egg in a hole) gets a layer of Muenster cheese in this quick and easy breakfast the whole family will love.
Overnight oats make breakfast a breeze--and with blueberries, banana, honey, vanilla, and pecans, this one's a delicious treat!
Oats, fruit, peanut butter, milk, and honey are blended together for a quick smoothie on a busy morning.
Ham slices are the crust in these simple, cheesy egg cups that are quick and easy to prepare and can be customized to suit your tastes.
Bread is topped with cinnamon butter, rolled, dipped in egg, and cooked into portable French toast dippers that kids love dipping in syrup.
Banana chocolate chip pancakes topped with whipped cream and strawberries turn the classic banana split sundae into a brunch-worthy dish.
This variation on eggs in a basket involves making French toast with the bread too, resulting in a quick, easy breakfast with extra protein.
These quick and easy flourless tortillas, with tapioca, coconut flour, and eggs, are a great addition to a paleo or gluten-free lifestyle.
For a satisfying breakfast that the whole family will love, cook up these quick and easy gluten-free blueberry banana buckwheat pancakes.
Sprinkle-speckled pancakes are drizzled with a sweet vanilla cream sauce in this fun breakfast recipe inspired by Funfetti(R) cake.
Get your daily fruits and vegetables and fuel up your body with a different color smoothie every day of the week. Variations are in notes.
If you are following a keto diet, you probably miss pancakes for breakfast. Try this recipe for low-carb, grain-free fluffy cakes to enjoy.
Perfect for brunch or a light dinner, this bacon and mushroom frittata is a complete meal with the addition of fresh spinach and smoked Gouda cheese.
The Holness family shares this Jamaican recipe for cornmeal porridge made with coconut milk and flavored with vanilla, nutmeg, and cinnamon.
Eggs are scrambled with crispy tortilla strips and a spicy tomato salsa in this quick and easy brunch dish, known as chilaquiles in Mexico.
Mango, banana, chia seeds, and turmeric are blended with almond milk in this tropical-inspired smoothie for a quick and easy breakfast.
This quick and easy omelet with artichoke hearts, tomatoes, and fresh spinach is a flavorful way to squeeze more vegetables into brunch.
Eggs are scrambled with red and green bell peppers, jalapeno, and chile powder in this Mexican-inspired twist on a breakfast classic.
Toasted English muffins make a perfect crust for mini breakfast pizzas.
Spinach, bacon, and eggs topped with cream and cheese are baked into a country loaf in a Panasonic CIO to make this brunch dish for a crowd.
Make pancakes just like your favorite country-style restaurant with this copycat recipe that combines sweet potato and banana into breakfast.
Whole wheat toast is topped with refried beans, mashed avocado, and a sunny-side up egg in this quick recipe inspired by Mexican flavors.
These flourless pancakes made with mashed banana, ground flax seeds, eggs, and cinnamon are easy to prepare for a gluten-free breakfast.
Made with shredded zucchini and potato flakes, these quick and easy gluten-free waffles can be served as a yummy breakfast, brunch, or lunch.
Freeze a batch of these pancakes loaded with healthy oats, banana, berries, and coconut milk and a kid-friendly breakfast is seconds away.
Made with fresh cherries, strawberries, banana, and coconut milk, this berry limeade smoothie is a tart, refreshing drink for a summer day.
Eggs, noodles, and cheese is baked together with spinach for a hearty breakfast, lunch, or dinner.
The typical quesadilla gets a makeover so you can start your day with a breakfast of ham, scrambled eggs, and lots of mozzarella cheese.
Cantaloupe and pineapple team up with green tea and mint creating a light green tea smoothie with yogurt for extra protein making it a meal replacement.
Sausage, potatoes, and eggs all feature in this hearty breakfast cooked in a single cast iron skillet, great shared with friends for brunch.
Bacon and Creole seasoning blend flavor this savory version of oatmeal; a hearty, nutritious breakfast ready in 5 minutes in your microwave.
Scamorza cheese and herbs are baked with eggs and Greek yogurt in this frittata alle erbette, an Italian dish perfect for brunch or breakfast.
Fresh blueberries are blended with avocado, banana, almond milk, and chia seeds into a quick and easy smoothie with a touch of sweetness.
A frittata made with cauliflower rice as the crust is quick and easy to make and fits into a gluten-free and paleo lifestyle!
Cinnamon roll dough and bacon come together in these bacon-stuffed cinnamon roll bites that will easily be the hit of weekend breakfast and brunch.
Mango and banana are blended with kale, flax seeds, and pepitas in this fresh green smoothie perfect for a quick breakfast on the go.
This hearty, crowd-pleasing egg casserole topped with Cheddar cheese makes a perfect breakfast or brunch dish after a night out on the town.
Almond milk, banana, protein powder, and peanut butter and blended together creating the best post-workout shake that will keep you full all morning.
These pumpkin pie-spiced waffles are made of buckwheat, soy milk, and stevia, an alternative to traditional flour, sugar, and milk recipes.
Crispy bacon and Cheddar cheese are sandwiched between two fried eggs in this quick and easy hearty breakfast dish for one.
This quick and easy meal replacement smoothie recipe is designed to pack enough protein in 16 ounces to get you through to lunchtime.
Oats, dates, apricots and mixed nuts make these breakfast bars a hearty start to any day. Add other fruits and nuts to make it your own.
Bacon grease takes the place of butter in these savory scones studded with bacon pieces, great served alongside breakfast or brunch.
These Marty Bars, packed with oats, fruit, and sweetened with applesauce, are a quick and easy choice for a light breakfast on-the-go.
Blueberry oatmeal with maple syrup is a quick and easy breakfast for busy weekday mornings.
Start the day strong with this nutrient-rich smoothie. Matcha green tea powder, avocado, protein powder, and milk pack a powerhouse punch.
A the favorite pork products: bacon, ham, and sausage are threaded onto a skewer and baked into a tasty snack called "breakfast on a stick".
Apples, pecans, cinnamon, and nutmeg are baked muffin cups with oats creating on-the-go baked oatmeal cups.
Blueberries, strawberries, and spinach are blended with milk and honey creating a quick and easy, on-the-go strawberry smoothie.
Pancakes are a breeze to make with this vegan recipe that calls for flax meal and orange juice in place of eggs and milk.
These delicious vegan oatmeal energy bars taste just like their full-fat, non-vegan oatmeal cookie cousins, but without all the guilt!
Sweet cheese filling goes well with sweet Polish nalesniki, also known as Polish blintzes or filled crepes.
This breakfast pasta recipe mixes farfalle with scrambled eggs, sliced hot dogs, and Cheddar cheese for a unique and comforting bowl of comfort when you need it in the morning (or after a very late night).
Combine Cheddar cheese, bacon, and eggs together in this overnight egg casserole that everyone will love for breakfast or brunch.
This orange, carrot, and ginger juice is packed with freshness and other good things, and comes with a delightful zing courtesy of the ginger.
This traditional recipe for Irish soda bread has been passed down through multiple generations and produces a tried-and-true result every time.
Our Spanish Omelet gets mucho flavor from smoked ham, VELVEETA, garlic and chopped fresh cilantro.
These chocolate-almond-coconut breakfast bars are quick and easy to prepare and will keep you full until lunch.
Impress your family and friends with this decadent recipe for peanut butter-filled crepes with warm chocolate sauce.
This barley and apple porridge is made with hulled barley with a little crunch from walnuts for a hearty alternative to oatmeal for breakfast.
Green apple, almond butter, almond milk, and cinnamon are blended together for a tasty, on-the-go smoothie.
Baked eggs in marinara sauce is a quick and easy breakfast that fits into the paleo diet lifestyle and Whole30(R) diet.
Grandma's secret recipe for breakfast eggs is out, and it's delicious! It's an egg scramble made with French fries.
Watermelon, strawberries, and mango are blended a good amount of lemon juice creating a sweet and tasty on-the-go lemonade smoothie.
Cheddar cheese, chives, and crumbled bacon give this recipe for overnight breakfast casserole a hearty and rich taste.
Corn and green chile peppers make these quick and easy Southwestern waffles a spicy and savory treat fit for either breakfast or dinner.
Homemade maple granola with pecans and coconut oil is a hearty and crunchy cereal you can eat alone and sprinkle over yogurt or ice cream.
This banana and peach smoothie is topped with coconut, almonds, and raisins creating a paleo-friendly smoothie bowl for a quick breakfast.
Zippy potato patties with green chiles, pickled jalapenos, and Tex-Mex cheese are a terrific use for leftover mashed potatoes.
Almond milk, banana, almond butter, chia seeds and cinnamon are blended together in this quick and easy breakfast smoothie.
Blueberries, cinnamon, and yogurt are blended together creating this blueberry and spice smoothie perfect for breakfast or a snack.
Eggs, Parmesan cheese, tomatoes, and olives are cooked together in this pizza frittata creating an Italian-inspired healthy dinner or brunch.
All the key flavors of German chocolate cake are simmered with oats in this quick and easy German chocolate cake oatmeal.
Beer and orange juice come together in this two-ingredient beermosa recipe, a nice alternative to the traditional mimosa.
Green tea kasutera, a Japanese sweet bread, is naturally green thanks to matcha green tea powder added to the batter.
Layers of cooked shredded pork sirloin roast, bread cubes, green chiles, goat cheese, and fresh sage are baked in an egg-milk base for this hearty brunch or main dish casserole.
Soymilk flaxseed pancakes are delicious and dairy-free with flax seeds added for an additional nutritional boost.
Give your morning an extra boost with this turmeric and ginger juice recipe including apples, orange, and lemon.
Acai berry sorbet is topped with granola, strawberries, and banana this the fruity recipe for an acai bowl similar to those found in Hawaii.
Cacao, banana, and vanilla soy milk are thickened with oatmeal and almonds for a breakfast treat that will keep you going all morning long.
Fried eggs and black beans top a quesadilla with Monterey Jack cheese, with avocado and sour cream garnish in this quick and easy breakfast.
This green smoothie packed with baby kale, bananas, apples, and 2 kinds of berries is a quick and easy drink to kick-start your morning.
This on-the-go, kale and avocado green smoothie with banana and white beans is a hearty way to start the day.
This Banana French Toast Sandwich with a hints of vanilla and cinnamon is a healthy breakfast for one so yummy it doesn't even need syrup.
For a teatime treat with a twist, try these French toast sandwiches filled with vanilla custard and topped with cream and strawberries.
Matcha powder, flax seeds, chia seeds, bananas, and spinach are blended together in this vegan smoothie that is a great start to the day.
Enjoy a slice of this banana bread made with whole wheat flour, flaxseed meal, oats, and buttermilk for breakfast or a snack during the day.
Brunch is for savory eggs, in my opinion. Serve this spicy Italian open-faced omelet with a cold glass of milk at your next brunch!
This frozen rose slushy is a refreshing summer cocktail made by combining Malbec wine and strawberries then freezing.
Here's a breakfast variation on poutine you may not have thought of. French fries are topped with bacon, hollandaise, and a sunny-side-up egg.
This milk-based smoothie made with frozen marionberries and sweetened with dark brown sugar makes a quick and tasty breakfast on the go.
Crisp on the outside, tangy and tender on the inside, these barely sweetened waffles made with sourdough starter made a delicious breakfast.
Dragon fruit and pineapple are blended with yogurt and coconut in this tropical smoothie that you can drink for breakfast, dessert, or as a snack.
French toast wrapped in bacon and fried in maple syrup is the perfect sweet and salty combination for breakfast or weekend brunch.
SPAM(R) with Bacon is sauteed with onion and cubed avocado and topped with an over easy egg.
A great take on a classic breakfast staple.
Fresh blueberries and spinach are blended with chocolate-flavored protein powder in this smooth shake that's easy, quick, and delicious.
A great twist on a classic breakfast treat, these yummy sweet potato waffles, made with cinnamon and brown sugar, are ready in 20 minutes.
A southern favorite made with sweet potatoes, banana, cinnamon, and pecans, this comforting bread recipe has been modified for a vegan diet.
Potatoes, luncheon meat, tomato sauce, and seasonings are combined and placed in a warm flour tortilla in this recipe for breakfast tacos.
This fragrant breakfast dish seasoned with garlic and rosemary is a warm version of egg salad made with tomatoes, spinach, and feta cheese.
Start your day with this refreshing coffee smoothie that combines brewed coffee with raspberries, coconut sugar, and your choice of milk.
This wholesome bread is made with quinoa, spelt flour, and almond milk and is given a hint of sweetness from honey in this easy, DIY recipe.
A classic chunky granola with a hint of peanut butter. Delicious on its own, in a bowl with milk, or tossed into yogurt or a trail mix.
With just 15 minutes of prep, this wholesome breakfast-inspired pot pie recipe is perfect for breakfast for dinner (brinner).
Peanut butter, strawberries, yogurt, and bananas are blended with almond milk in this 5-ingredient peanut butter and jelly smoothie.
Your brunch guests will love this quick and easy mashup apple fritter bread made with apple pie filling that's perfect for feeding a crowd.
Spinach, feta, and sun-dried tomatoes add flavor and color to this Mediterranean-inspired egg white frittata that is deceptively decadent.
Feta cheese, tomatoes, Kalamata olives, and avocado mingle in this Greek omelet that just might become a new Sunday morning tradition.
Toasted whole wheat English muffins with cooked egg whites, spinach, and tomato slices make a quick and healthy breakfast sandwich.
Make any morning special with this easy yet impressive French toast!
This one-skillet hash combines sweet potatoes, Yukon gold potatoes, bell peppers, bacon, ham, and spinach topped with eggs--what a breakfast!
Green chiles, eggs, and cottage cheese are mixed with baking mix in this Mexican-inspired breakfast casserole that is quick and easy to make.
This easy egg, corned beef hash, and peppers, and mushroom casserole is great for breakfast, brunch, or a weeknight dinner.
Mini tart shells filled with corned beef hash, shredded Cheddar cheese, and eggs are baked until set for this easy breakfast or brunch item.
Classic French toast gets kicked up a notch with the addition of Buffalo wing sauce and Parmesan cheese in this savory French toast recipe.
This breakfast favorite puffs as it bakes. Be sure to be waiting for it to come out of the oven as it deflates rather quickly.
These duck fat potatoes are pan-roasted to develop a rich flavor and crispy crust your family and friends will love for breakfast or dinner.
Eggs blended with fresh spinach are cooked into a green omelet and topped with corned beef hash and mozzarella cheese in this easy recipe.
Start your day off with a delicious breakfast with scrambled eggs and mushrooms, bacon, sausage, and Monterey cheese served on a flatbread!
Bananas, manuka honey, peanut butter, and yogurt are blended with almond milk creating a sweet banana smoothie, a great on-the-go meal.
Fresh raspberries and lemon juice are the perfect pairing in these easy waffles with a little extra richness thanks to cream cheese.
Prep this delicious oats, yogurt, and berry dish in the evening, and enjoy an 'instant' breakfast the next morning.
Oats, pumpkin, apple, pecans, and spices are baked for easy an breakfast or snack.
Rice, eggs, and bacon topped with cinnamon sugar is a winning combination for a quick and easy breakfast bowl or breakfast for dinner.
Heavy cream, butter, and brown sugar add depth to steel-cut oats in this unique oatmeal recipe inspired by the Bananas Foster dessert.
Carrots, banana, red bell pepper, and cucumbers are blended with grapefruit juice in this refreshing, on-the-go smoothie ready in 15 minutes.
Blueberries, coconut milk, and flax seeds are blended together creating a hearty breakfast smoothie, an easy on-the-go meal in the morning.
A hollowed-out baguette is stuffed with eggs, bacon, sun-dried tomatoes, and fontina cheese in this easy recipe great for game day brunches.
Turmeric adds a nice yellow color and spice to this banana oatmeal topped with peanut butter, a hearty breakfast to start the day.
Whole wheat flour and millet are mixed with hemp seeds, flax seeds, and chia seeds in this hearty, multigrain seeded bread recipe.
Butter, MCT oil, and cacao powder are blended with water creating a Bulletproof(R) hot chocolate, a chocolate version of the coffee drink.
Loaded with whole grain oats, mixed berries, and a bit of pure maple syrup, these overnight oatmeal bars are the perfect grab-and-go breakfast before work or school.
Skip the crust for a low-carb, keto version of a brunch staple - quiche with fresh spinach, mushrooms, and cherry tomatoes.
Take these fluffy Japanese pancakes to new heights by cooking the batter in ring molds for an fun and super impressive breakfast treat.
These pancakes are made with coconut flour, cream, and butter, and are sweetened with stevia - they are low carb, gluten free, and sugar free.
If you've got stale tortillas lying around, this chilaquiles scramble with eggs, Cotija cheese, and avocado just might be the answer.
Overnight oats are perfect for busy people who want a nutritious breakfast in the morning but need their sleep. It's prepped in minutes at night and ready when you get up.
This is a delicious vegetarian brunch dish where eggs are poached in salsa, served on corn tortillas, and topped with cheese, sour cream, and black olives.
Bionicos are tasty yogurt fruit salads, drizzled with a combination of yogurt, sweetened condensed milk, and Mexican crema.
Sneaking an egg into your oatmeal results in a high-protein breakfast that's so deliciously rich, it should be common practice!
Packed with protein, this delicious smoothie reminiscent of the famous chocolate peanut butter
cup is sure to keep you full until lunchtime or beyond.
These easy-to-make French toast sticks turn out great in an air fryer. Make sure the bread is dry, otherwise the toast sticks can fall apart during the soaking process.
This super simple egg white omelet has only 6 ingredients and is loaded with protein and good fats to start your day off right!
This diced potato breakfast casserole is a powerhouse mixture of farm-fresh eggs, Greek yogurt, and feta cheese, sauteed kale, and tomatoes.
This potato breakfast casserole is full of flavorful Cheddar cheese, bacon, onion, parsley, and bell pepper; eggs and cheese make it hearty.
Oats, pumpkin puree, almond milk, and spices combine to make this dairy-free breakfast with a twist - a delicious way to start your day!
These low-calorie, low-fat egg bites with feta cheese, spinach, and roasted red peppers make a quick weekday breakfast and they're equally as convenient for midday snacks.
When you make Scotch eggs in your air fryer, you get all the deliciousness without the mess and added fat of deep frying.  Serve with homemade chutney dipping sauce.
If you want to add anything to these scrambled eggs, add butter, which will make them creamy. Don't want to microwave them? Cook them on the stovetop over medium heat.
Almond Breeze almondmilk and oats make a great no-cook oatmeal that you can make for breakfast up to 3 days in advance.
Chicken thighs and pancetta make for a succulent chicken apple sausage, used to start a savory sage-infused gravy and served atop Chef John's buttermilk biscuits.
These delicate, crepe-like pancakes are vegan and easy to make. Your kids will love them! Serve with sliced bananas, syrup, and butter.
Sauteed mushrooms and green onions are a nutritious and delicious addition to these quick and easy scrambled eggs.
These smoothie packs blended with Almond Breeze almondmilk will get any day started right.
Easy and tasty crepes that use beer as the leavening agent.
These hearty crepes are made with whole-wheat and all-purpose flour, soy milk, and flax seeds. They are wonderful topped with blueberry sauce.
Sliced hard-cooked eggs are simmered with vegetables in a mushroom gravy. Serve over  biscuits or toast. My mom started making this when I was little with all the left over eggs from Easter.  It's awesome and the recipe can be changed a lot. You can use leftover ham or chicken too. It basically a throw in kind of recipe.
A very easy recipe that makes a unique breakfast! Can also be served as a side dish or an appetizer.
Sausage, jalapeno and cheese are layered with bread in this spicy Tex-Mex breakfast casserole.
Yummy and easy - this dish is great for when you have a craving for quiche, but don't have the time, ingredients or want the fat. Soy yogurt can be substituted for a vegan version.
Shrimp, Edam, and mushroom make this an elegant quiche. I use Red Hot Dutch Edam to give this a spicy kick, but if you can't find it, use regular Edam and spike it with red pepper flakes instead.
Limey, mango juice is fantastic for summertime refreshment!
Pineapple, strawberries, and blueberries make a refreshing summer cool off drink which is also great to serve at parties!  I serve mine with whipped cream on top!
Bacon, ham, Cheddar cheese, and a hint of cumin flavor these delightful mini quiches.
Fresh orange juice gets an adult twist blended with rum and an egg, and turns into a breakfast cocktail when garnished with an orange slice and maraschino cherry.
Crispy fried potato cutlets are a delicious companion for eggs and bacon.
Carrots, coconut flakes and cherries absolutely shine in four easy-to-make loaves that are baked in 16-ounce cans.
Start your day with a stack full of fun! Toasted whole-grain bread is layered with tender, cooked collard greens, scrambled egg whites, and sauteed Canadian bacon. The whole thing is topped with cheddar cheese and broiled until hot and bubbly. 
A green smoothie made with aloe vera juice, spinach, kale, chard, and banana is a filling, on-the-go breakfast.
These quick and easy pancakes get a boost from granola and almonds with delicious results that kids love!
This creamy, refreshing strawberry mint smoothie is the perfect way to start your day.
Banana, pineapple, and coconut milk are blended together creating a hearty pina colada smoothie for an on-the-go breakfast.
Save the leftover pulp from juicing vegetables and add to eggs, cheese, and yogurt creating a colorful and veggie-packed quiche.
Marinated artichoke hearts, mushrooms, onion, and garlic are the stars in this baked egg dish.
This very orange smoothie gets its color from carrots, mango, and red bell peppers creating a colorful on-the-go meal for busy mornings.
Ham and cheese oven omelet is made a little lighter with low-fat ham and reduced-fat provolone cheese.
This versatile and quick lemon breakfast bread is a great way to start your day.
Quinoa and walnuts are added to whole wheat pumpkin bread batter for a heartier and nutty bread perfect during Thanksgiving season.
You can prepare all ingredients in advance so assembly is easy the next day for a quick brunch.
Use a skillet with a lid to make a frittata on your stove. This one has olives, feta cheese, red bell pepper, broccoli, and sweet onion.
Blueberries, mint, avocado, and orange juice are blended together for a refreshing smoothie that is vegan and gluten free.
Soul food pancakes just like grandma used to make have fried plantains in the batter for a little extra TLC on weekend mornings.
French toast topped with homemade apple pie filling is a delightfully sweet way to start the weekend.
A deluxe version of crunchy oat granola is flavored with pumpkin and pecans and sweetened with agave syrup for a bowl of hearty goodness that will keep you going all morning.
This is quick, easy, and good for breakfast at home or on the camp stove while camping!
A popular dish in Poland, these apple pancakes are loved by the whole family and are a yummy breakfast or dessert with powdered sugar.
Easy rice flour pancakes are a simple and gluten-free accompaniment to beef curries or any savory filling.
Dates, figs, and walnuts are baked into a delightful quick bread that is a little different from the rest. Serve with cream cheese.
Oranges, vanilla yogurt, and cinnamon are blended together for a quick smoothie that is easy to drink.
The world's best Irish soda bread, made with oats and brown sugar, is perfectly moist with a crunchy exterior and is a festive morning treat for St. Patrick's Day.
Use dark cocoa powder to get a tasty chocolate flavor in these gluten-free waffles with zucchini.
These Slovakian-style pancakes are terrific served with confectioners' sugar and whatever toppings you like with sweet crepes.
This Italian-inspired Easter frittata made with sausage, salami, mozzarella cheese, and ricotta cheese is a tasty and rich dish to serve at holiday brunch.
Banana and teff waffles with walnuts are a kid-approved breakfast item that are a perfect mix of tender and crisp. Serve with your favorite toppings.
This kale smoothie with pineapple, dates, and blackberries is a quick and easy, on-the-go breakfast.
All the flavors of carrot cake are blended together in a smoothie creating a nicely spiced treat for an on-the-go breakfast.
Make these filling bacon and avocado burritos when you're on the go!
This quick and easy strawberry smoothie is made with ground oatmeal and flax.
Zucchini and carrot are blended with Greek yogurt and flax seeds, creating a quick-and-easy breakfast smoothie.
This strawberry and mango smoothie with coconut milk, aloe juice, and almond butter is a satisfying and hearty way to start the day.
Homemade creamed chip beef is baked with scrambled eggs and bacon creating a crowd-pleasing casserole.
Quick and easy ham a la king is made simple using 4 ingredients and is ready in 15 minutes for a tasty comfort-food meal.
Spinach, Greek yogurt, chia seeds, flax seed, and almonds are blended with fruit creating a quick, on-the-go smoothie.
Step your omelet-game up a notch by filling your eggs with prosciutto, onion, and tomato cooked in white wine. Don't forget cheese!
Mix quick-cooking oats with chia seeds, flax, brown sugar, walnuts, and cinnamon for a homemade instant oatmeal to which you just add blueberries.
Start your day off right with this recipe for a strawberry smoothie made with spinach, apple, carrot, and banana.
Sweet potatoes make a great stand-in for pumpkin when making breakfast pancakes with fall flavors thanks to this recipe.
Quick and easy English quiche Lorraine is perfect for breakfast and a great crowd-pleasing recipe.
Scrambled eggs get a hint of Indian-inspiration when curry powder and cumin are added to the mix.
Grated carrots are added to the classic quick bread recipe creating a delightful zucchini-carrot bread for breakfast or brunch.
The unique flavor of truffle oil and shaved truffles transforms this Parmesan cheese omelette.
Creamy pumpkin oatmeal, lightly spiced, makes a warm and cozy breakfast.
Enjoy this blueberry cucumber smoothie any time of day for a refreshing treat.
Pumpkin puree, Greek yogurt, pumpkin pie spice, and banana are blended together creating a pumpkin pie-flavored smoothie for an on-the-go breakfast.
Vegan whole wheat apple pancakes, made with coconut oil and almond milk, are a delicious alternative when you are avoiding dairy products.
Kale, spinach, soy milk, raspberries, pineapple, and banana combine to make this delicious green breakfast smoothie.
This hearty casserole is great for brunch or a main meal. Serve with a fruit or green salad for a simple yet delicious meal.
Romaine lettuce, milk, strawberries, and banana all blend together in this unique quick and easy smoothie.
This tasty Mexican-style frittata based on huevos rancheros is quick and easy to make with salsa, onion, sour cream, and cilantro.
Each breakfast bar is packed full of rolled oats, nuts, raisins, coconut, and almonds. The ingredients are just toasted, chilled, and cut into bars.
A hearty recipe for whole wheat banana bread is packed with dates, walnuts, and optional coconut for a great take-along breakfast or part of a morning meal that will stick to you all day long. Sour cream keeps it moist, and brown sugar and cinnamon make it yummy. Recipe makes 4 loaves.
Made from 100% whole-grains, soymilk and fresh berries, these light-as-air pancakes are packed with essential nutrients. And they are lactose-free!
Impress your guests with this creamy and cheese-filled potato casserole seasoned with plenty of herbs. Bake immediately or refrigerate overnight and bake in the morning!
This bloody mary recipe is a blast thanks to liberal additions of horseradish and hot pepper sauce.
This elegant quiche is filled with leeks, Swiss cheese, and bacon--for a crowd-pleasing brunch main dish.
Put the taste of fall in your breakfast bowl with this oatmeal recipe featuring pumpkin pie spice and cinnamon.
Peppered bacon and Italian-style seasoning flavor this venison sausage your family will love.
Kulambu is a spicy stew from Tamil, India. The main flavors are from tamarind and jaggery (palm sugar). This is a delicious kulambu using boiled eggs. You can easily use fish or crab instead of the eggs.
A rich batter is layered with sweet cottage cheese filling in a casserole dish, then baked until golden brown and served with strawberry sauce to make a sumptuous dairy main dish or dessert that's perfect for the holiday table.  
Here's Irish soda bread the old school way, with just flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, and buttermilk. It's not baked, it's cooked on a griddle. Serve with butter and jam, or fry it up crisp in bacon drippings.
Bacon & egg pocket: Breakfast favourites come together in this quick and easy wrap - perfect for breakfast or lunch on the go!
Almond milk adds a fragrant richness to this filling smoothie.
Tender chayote is cooked with onions and eggs. Topped with American cheese and popped in a hot oven for a few minutes, and you'll have a delicious breakfast in no time.
This tasty tart with sausage, dried cranberries, lots of mushrooms, cheese and eggs will be the star of your holiday brunch.
Make your next brunch a special occasion with tostadas filled with crumbled sausage, shredded cheese, cooked eggs and salsa.
Homemade crepes are filled with zucchini blossoms and topped with Manchego cheese in this authentic dish.
An intensely savory sauce made from miso and flavored with tiny Japanese dried fish is made with tender cubes of silken tofu and crunchy raw green onions. It's served hot over cooked white rice.
A big baked omelet, flavored with garlic, basil and rosemary, gets a crisp topping of thin-sliced fried sweet potato.
A warm and gooey way to start the day. Just layer a casserole dish with apples mixed with Marzetti(R) Old Fashioned Caramel Dip and pieces of French toast then bake.
These pancakes are made with baking mix and have a hint of ginger to give them a lovely Christmas aroma.
Carrots, beets, nuts, and cottage cheese are blended together for a hearty and colorful smoothie.
This upside-down quiche tastes just right, thanks to ham, cream, and plenty of melted cheese.
Coconut and cardamom are wrapped in an envelope-shaped crepe for a sweet breakfast treat that the whole family will enjoy.
Crepes sprinkled with caraway seeds are a perfect accompaniment to Indian dishes or a great vehicle to eat leftovers.
This french toast is light, fluffy, and sweet because you're using angel food cake instead of bread.
A luscious spinach and mushroom quiche flavored with tarragon is rich with white Cheddar cheese.
Perfect for family brunch, these verde chilaquiles are tortilla chips blanketed with a spicy tomatillo sauce, shredded chicken, and olives.
Use prepared baking mix and pesto to make a quick and easy pesto-flavored pancake for an herbal-flavored brunch treat.
This bowl of oats, yogurt, sweet potato, chia seeds, and flax meal will be ready and waiting for your morning breakfast after an overnight soak.
Serve these fun and easy tacos with your favourite toppings for the full taco treatment that kids love.
Oatmeal pancakes with apple-maple sauce are the perfect recipe for hearty breakfast that everyone will love.
Use this recipe to easily and quickly turn plain bagels into breakfast pizzas by topping them with cooked bacon, sausage gravy, and mozzarella cheese.
French toast sticks made with chia seeds and coconut are dipped in a raspberry-yogurt sauce that will be a hit in your family every time.
Soft and creamy Boursin(R) cheese is baked into an apple pancake for a quick and easy gourmet breakfast or brunch.
Banana, apricots, milk, wheat germ, and oat bran make up this tasty breakfast smoothie that's sweetened with maple syrup.
Vegetarian quiche loaded with vegetables and a hint of feta and mozzarella cheese is a healthier version of traditional quiche recipes.
Give yourself a mini-vacation in your own kitchen with this tropical bread!Deliciousserved withbreakfastorbrunch.
You'll never believe that this high-fiber chocolate hemp smoothie is vegan!
Carrot cake pancakes with cream cheese frosting are stacked into a charming cake in this crowd-pleasing breakfast treat.
Curried eggs over toast is a quick and easy way to prepare eggs for breakfast, lunch, or dinner.
Spinach and courgette quiche with hints of bacon and onion is a delightful brunch item that is ready in 1 hour.
Make your own almond, maple, and coconut granola for a sweet and crunchy cereal in under 1 hour.
This hearty banana bread has plenty seeds, teff, and whole wheat flour for a healthy start to the day or a filling snack.
Banana bread with walnuts and dark chocolate chunks is easy to prepare in the bread machine and makes a tasty quick bread.
Enjoy these gluten-free, egg-free pancakes, made with coconut flour, coconut milk, and pumpkin, with maple syrup.
A coconut and banana smoothie with a double dose of coconut is an easy-breezy tropical way to start your day.
Enjoy this blueberry smoothie with kiwi and yogurt as a refresher on a hot day.
Try something new by blending the exotic caramel-tasting sapodilla fruit into your next chocolate strawberry smoothie.
This hearty quiche is the perfect brunch dish to bring to your friends' Sunday morning get-together when you bake it in a Reynolds(R) Bakeware Pie Pan.
This vegan strawberry smoothie gets a silky texture from the addition of tofu and is quick and easy to prepare for an on-the-go breakfast.
This invigorating smoothie made with strawberries, blueberries, and agave gets and extra kick from fresh ginger.
A homemade smoothie packed with apple, grapes, and berries gets an extra kick from fresh ginger that is out of this world.
Pancakes just got a new twist thanks to cocoa powder, coconut milk, and flax seed added to the batter. Serve with butter and syrup!
Homemade cereal is quick and easy to make when you combine oats, chia seeds, and dried fruit together. Just add water for a hearty breakfast!
Celebrate Passover with these delicious pancakes made with matzo meal, almond meal, and chocolate chips.
Savory ham pie made with Swiss cheese and a rich filling is a quick and easy comfort food to serving at brunch on Easter morning.
Raspberries, pears, and pecans are folded into this quick bread batter creating a delightful breakfast treat for the summertime.
Tostada shells are layered with seasoned ground beef and potatoes topped with an egg and sprinkling of cilantro for a simple Mexican-inspired breakfast.
Harrison Hot Springs in Canada serves muesli like this one on the breakfast buffet. Make this the night before to have in the morning - a very fast, easy breakfast.
Sausage popover is a classic southern dish made with sausage baked under a flaky topping with French-fried onions. Serve with a colorful bowl of mixed fruit salad.
Blend watermelon, peaches, and other summer fruits together with Greek yogurt for a refreshing summertime smoothie.
Lots of spices in this ground bison and egg omelet make for a great taco filling, and the pineapple salsa with fresh cilantro is the perfect topping.
Mini frittatas loaded with asparagus, Swiss cheese, and maple syrup are a quick and easy on-the-go breakfast the whole family will love.
Pumpkin pie and sweet potato pie filling are a delicious addition to the traditional pumpkin bread recipe and perfect to make the day after Thanksgiving.
A little coffee powder brings a burst of caffeine to these breakfast bars with coconut, cinnamon, fruit, and nuts.
Blend honeydew melon and honey together for a refreshing summer juice.
This versatile baked egg and kale dish can be served as a savory breakfast dish or as a main dish at dinner.
Acorn squash quiche made with leftover turkey is a great dish to prepare for the day after Thanksgiving.
Mango, tahini, and lime juice are blended together into a refreshing and hearty smoothie to start your day with a hint of tropical.
Shredded potatoes, Cheddar cheese, bacon, and sun-dried tomatoes are baked into a rich comfort food perfect for brunch or as a dinner side dish.
Think of these pancakes as mini carrot cakes for breakfast.
Transform your veggies into a flavorful super veggie juice with a ginger kick to start your day.
Tomatoes, kale, greens, and lemon are run through the juicer for a hearty juice that will have you feeling 'V-great'!
Chia seeds, flax seed, chocolate soy milk, and plain yogurt are the base for this smoothie with bananas and strawberries.
Enjoy this smoothie packed with bananas, strawberries, flax, and agave for breakfast or on the go!
This cheese- and tortilla-filled frittata is topped with a homemade tomato salsa flavored with smoky poblano peppers.
Crumbled bacon and sauteed onions are stirred into a custard base of clams, eggs, cream and nutmeg, then baked until the filling is set. Serve hot or at room temperature.
Designed for those mornings-after when you need a little boost to get your morning moving! Plenty of protein with just a hint of heat, this brings a little moment of happiness to an otherwise unpleasant start!
Steamed corned beef is a classic Bahamian dish also known as 'Fire Engine'. Traditionally served with grits for breakfast or with white rice for lunch or dinner. Steam is a Bahamian term for anything fried down and simmered in a tomato base (bologna, pork chops or chicken can also be served this way).
A plain pancake is made with fresh sage and topped with Romano cheese. Excellent for breakfast, brunch, or supper with sausage, bacon, and fried apples.
Adding some matcha (green tea powder) to this sweet bread recipe adds nutrition, flavor, and a hint of color.
Switch things up for brunch by adding a hamburger patty, crumbled bacon, and American cheese to your omelet!
Delicious quiche perfect for breakfast, lunch, or dinner! This recipes uses fresh-picked chanterelle mushrooms, but you could use another kind easily.
Scrambled eggs with tomatoes are a great start for the day. Serve with crusty bread or toast. The eggs taste best when scrambled with sun-ripened tomatoes.
Radish greens and leeks are sauteed and then folded inside a fluffy egg frittata for a delicious brunch dish. Top with a dash or two of your favorite hot sauce.
Layer hash browns with eggs, bacon, and cheese to make this breakfast casserole you can enjoy with the family on Christmas morning.
This quick and easy baked salmon Florentine recipe covers a fillet with fresh spinach, a simple blender cream sauce, and shredded mozzarella cheese.
This recipe teaches you how to cook perfectly crisp bacon in the air fryer. It takes about 15 minutes, and you'll have no mess in your kitchen.
In this recipe, gluten-free waffles with a delicate yeast flavor get a crispy and crunchy outside, but are melt-in-your-mouth soft on the inside. Start them the night before.
This savory take on quiche with sweet potatoes, scallions, and mascarpone is sure to satisfy at brunch.
Eggs are baked directly inside avocado halves and topped with crumbled bacon in this fun and easy recipe.
Feed your family or prep breakfast for the week with this easy one-pot medley of bacon, eggs, hash browns, peppers, and cheese--all the best breakfast staples.
Stuffed with spinach and Swiss cheese, this quiche Florentine is a delicious option for a savory brunch.
This gooey, caramelized monkey bread made from scratch pulls apart effortlessly when you grab a piece!
You don't have to plan ahead to make this easy breakfast casserole of ham, eggs, and vegetables, since there's no overnight soak required.
These tasty, healthy, green waffles are packed with the superfoods spinach and chia, and feature cottage cheese, oats, and applesauce. They make a quick and easy breakfast option!
This winter coffee beverage will wake you up quick. Goes great with Mexican breakfast foods or to serve at a Mexican brunch on Cinco de Mayo.
This is a quick breakfast frittata for 1 person, made with pesto, ricotta, and Parmesan cheese. From start to finish, it is ready in about 5 minutes.
Cheesy green chile eggs come together in a snap in the microwave and you can use whichever cheese you prefer. Top with salsa if desired.
This no-fail recipe for poached eggs is topped with a blend of olive oil and lemon juice which gives the yolks a creamy texture, almost like a hollandaise sauce.
Follow this foolproof method for perfect poached eggs every time. All you need is a pan of simmering water and a couple of teaspoons of vinegar.
Gluten-free crepes made with sorghum flour are less than 20 minutes away; fill them with sweet or savory ingredients as a gourmet breakfast.
This quick and easy recipe for Swedish pancakes flavored with vanilla extract and nutmeg is a family-friendly option for breakfast or brunch.
An Instant Pot(R) cooks a hearty bowl of spiced cranberry and pumpkin steel-cut oatmeal in mere minutes; finish it off with nuts and honey!
Combining grated, sauteed cauliflower, egg whites, and cottage cheese, these crispy, spicy paleo pancakes are easy to bake in a muffin tin.
Kids' eyes will light up when they see these over-the-top s'mores waffle sandwiches filled with chocolate spread and s'mores baking pieces.
This is a tasty low-carb, keto, and gluten-free savory quiche made with an almond-flour crust; just perfect for an easy weeknight dinner.
Turn leftover chicken into this simple and gourmet chicken savory quiche with Gouda cheese. Just a perfect quick and easy dinner.
A cheese omelette is a great breakfast option with very few ingredients that one usually has at hand and it only requires a bit of patience.
Creamy rolled oats cooked with cinnamon and maple get extra love from peanut butter and your favorite preserves for a sweet breakfast treat.
Whip up a batch of these omelet muffins for a week's worth of breakfasts, packed with spinach, bell pepper, turkey sausage, chives, and cheese.
Whip up this simple rice omelet for a satisfying breakfast or brunch of rice fried with ham, tomato, cucumber and carrots wrapped in egg.
Use your air fryer to create these breakfast toad-in-the-hole tarts that are simple to make and impressive to serve to guests.
Pork sausage, sweet potatoes, bell peppers, and roasted poblanos come together in this Southwestern breakfast hash topped with fried eggs.
These egg bites packed with spinach and Muenster cheese can be made in your Instant Pot(R) for handy breakfasts on the go.
Zucchini smoothie? You bet -- blended with orange juice and banana, you won't taste the zucchini and your body will appreciate the vegetable serving.
Steel-cut oats are simmered with dried blueberries, cranberries, and pecans, then jarred for easy storage in this make-ahead breakfast recipe.
Potato tots topped with spicy eggs scrambled with green onions and bell pepper are then topped with Cheddar cheese for an awesome egg bowl breakfast.
Chia seeds, oats, and banana soak overnight in almond milk for a nutritious vegan breakfast of champions. In the morning, it can either be eaten cold or heated up.
This latte is made with 2 types of coconut milk, coconut oil, coconut extract, and brown sugar for the die-hard coconut fan.
Our Coconut Almond Blend is the perfect tropical base for this pineapple-mango smoothie.
Wake up to this refreshing carrot smoothie that's packed full of good stuff like spinach, protein, and frozen fruit.
This amazing zucchini frittata looks and tastes amazing, and it's just so quick and easy to make! Eggs, zucchini, and Gouda cheese make keto look good.
These steel-cut oats are so creamy and easy to make in the Instant Pot(R)! Seasoned with pumpkin spice, this is the perfect quick and easy breakfast for two.
Try this tasty keto and paleo breakfast shakshuka full of greens! Delicious, quick, and so easy to make in just minutes in your Instant Pot(R)!
Use a sous vide to get perfectly cooked eggs with barely solidified yolks without sacrificing firm whites.
These tasty vegan overnight oats will keep you feeling full all morning; they're perfect for planning ahead and grabbing for a morning on the go.
Chef John makes it easier than ever to eat better and feel great every morning with this 3-ingredient breakfast bowl that highlights sheep's milk and Ben Franklin's favorite fruit, apples!
Playing with your food can be delicious - just try this super easy breakfast recipe for egg-in-a-hole toast topped with avocado and a touch of Gruyere cheese.
A slice of this sweet quick bread made with almond flour and coconut milk is delightful for breakfast with a cup of tea or coffee.
Try your smoothie in a bowl! Packed will all the goodness of a fruity sweetness and topped with a bit of crunch.
These Southwest egg and cheese boats are flavor-packed hot sandwiches you can assemble in minutes and serve for brunch or a weeknight meal.
Okra and potatoes are coated in seasoned cornmeal and fried in oil in this tasty African-inspired side dish called Kingombo Patatas.
This bacon, onion, and egg muffin recipe can be customized any way you like to make a grab-and-go breakfast your family will enjoy.
These holiday-inspired cranberry orange pancakes are gluten-free thanks to sorghum flour and are bursting with fresh citrus flavor.
Quick and easy brown soda bread is simple to make in less than an hour for an Irish-inspired treat. Serve each slice thickly spread with butter.
These oatmeal pancakes with cinnamon, applesauce, and brown sugar are a crowd-pleasing, quick and easy meal to make for breakfast or brunch.
These egg muffin cakes are packed with bratwurst, cheese, and seasonings for a hearty on-the-go breakfast to keep you going all morning.
Eggs and heavy cream are whisked together and cooked in coconut oil to make this basic omelet that fits in with the Ketogenic diet.
This cheese-y quiche, baked on a bed of hash browns with a sausage 'crust,' would be perfect for brunch.
Perfect for breakfast or lunch, these wonderful pita bread sandwiches are filled with chicken sausage, roasted vegetables, and goat cheese.
These low-calorie overnight oats with apple butter and chai tea have no added sugars and can be made ahead for a grab-and-go breakfast.
Chocolate chips and milk chocolate powdered drink mix with vanilla and spice are perfect for weekend breakfast or brunch.
This simple smoothie bowl recipe with aa, banana, and soy milk is topped with granola and makes a great healthy breakfast for every day.
Inspired by snickerdoodle cookies, these fluffy breakfast pancakes are made of a cinnamon-buttermilk batter and topped with cinnamon sugar.
These clever brookie pancakes with semisweet chocolate chips and a brownie swirl are a breakfast staple and midnight snack rolled into one.
A favorite summer beverage, this mango drink is easy and quick; you can be enjoying this cool drink in the hot sun in just about 5 minutes.
This scrumptious sweet potato casserole with bacon and green vegetables is ideal for an easy breakfast, brunch, or simple entertaining.
These Eggs Benedict use fresh mozzarella cheese and prepared hollandaise sauce so your favorite brunch dish is on the table is just minutes.
Blueberries, spinach, soy milk, and a Granny Smith apple are blended together to make this breakfast detox smoothie full of green goodness.
Latkes, or potato pancakes, are a traditional Jewish dish often served during Hanukkah. This version features Bruce's Yams Cut Sweet Potatoes and parsley.
Start your morning off right with a cool and refreshing Sweet Potato Smoothie Bowl, packed with fresh fruit, yogurt and sunflower seeds.
Simply mix oats with milk, lemon zest, and vanilla extract before going to bed to start your morning off right with overnight oats.
Yogurt, muesli, and fresh berries are spooned over a banana in this quick and easy breakfast sundae that's easy to pack for a camping trip.
Chia seeds, pineapple, almond butter, and bananas are blended together in this on-the-go smoothie that is vegan and paleo-friendly.
Banana, oats, yogurt, honey, and cinnamon are blended with almond milk in this quick and easy oatmeal smoothie, a great on-the-go meal.
Arepas (maize cakes) are split and filled with browned corned beef hash, black beans, tomato, avocado, and a poached egg.
Corned beef hash cakes are topped with baby arugula, a poached egg, and a drizzle of hollandaise sauce and balsamic glaze.
Make someone's morning! These hearty burritos are filled with eggs, cheese, bacon, and refried beans.
Pumpkin puree and autumnal spices like allspice and ginger make these gluten-free quinoa pancakes an enjoyable breakfast any day of the year.
These gluten-free waffles made with rice flour are absolutely delicious and very quick and easy to make for weekdays or weekend brunch.
Oats are soaked in coconut milk and chia seeds and mixed with strawberries and apples in this overnight vegan muesli recipe, a family favorite.
Quaker Old Fashioned Oats are the not-so-secret ingredient in these amazing pancakes. Top them off with different fruit, spices, or chocolate chips for some truly delicious variations.
Crispy corn tortillas, eggs, and enchilada sauce are the main components of this quick and easy chilaquiles, a Mexican breakfast recipe.
This classic Italian frittata made with zucchini and zucchini blossoms is bursting with summery flavors and great for buffets or picnics.
Roasted potato slices are topped with sausage, peppers, onions, and cheese in these filling breakfast stacks that are great alongside eggs.
Change up your breakfast routine with a quick and easy bowl of hot quinoa made with apple, cinnamon, and nutmeg and sweetened with honey.
Vanilla Greek yogurt and almond milk add protein to this blackberry and banana smoothie that's an easy choice for breakfast on the go.
When it's time to impress, turn to this indulgent benedict made with Jones breakfast sausage, creamy avocados and an incredible white Cheddar hollandaise.
The recipe for this no-knead English muffin bread made with half whole wheat flour is easy to follow and makes great toast for breakfast.
Avocado and almond milk are blended with honey in this green smoothie that is delicious! Take is for an on-the-go paleo and vegan treat.
Cinnamon, apple, and banana are combined with granola and oats to make this "granolameal" recipe that is a quick and easy twist on breakfast.
Mornings are easy and delicious with overnight oatmeal that tastes like apple pie! Make them ahead for a busy week.
Even the ice cubes are made with coffee in this caffeine-packed, skinny iced beverage with sugar-free white chocolate and caramel creamer.
Peanut butter adds creamy richness to these scrambled eggs seasoned with ginger and garlic that are a savory, filling breakfast for 2.
Kagianas, also called strapatsada, is a quick and easy Greek recipe that consists of just 3 ingredients: eggs, fresh tomatoes, and olive oil.
Chia seeds and walnuts are soaked overnight then blended with sesame tahini and honey to make this delicious chia milk protein shake.
This crunchy and nutty granola made with quinoa, almonds, and pumpkin seeds is sweetened with honey and held together with coconut oil.
Tortillas, egg, and bacon are cooked in a mug in the microwave in this easy bacon and egg breakfast bowl ready in less than 10 minutes.
Bright yellow banh xeo stuffed with shrimp and crispy bean sprouts are rolled up in lettuce leaves in this Vietnamese street snack recipe.
This quick and easy smoothie is a refreshing and tangy blend of carrot, apple, cucumber, orange juice, turmeric, chia, and flax seeds.
Spinach, kiwi fruit, avocado, and banana are blended with green tea for a nourishing green tea smoothie with a kick of zesty ginger.
Easy monkey bread recipe layers biscuit pieces in between a Swiss Miss chocolate glaze for a pull apart gooey treat to top with Reddi-wip.
Made with sugar and then folded until square, this take on the traditional tamagoyaki, or Japanese Sweet Omelet, is a quick and easy recipe.
A quick and easy breakfast recipe, the tamagoyaki is a tasty Japanese sweet omelet made by adding sugar to eggs and folding into a square.
Cashew butter and date smoothie with banana, blueberries, and flax is a dreamy and creamy on-the-go breakfast that is vegan too!
A cheesy corned beef hash is folded into eggs in this easy crustless quiche recipe perfect for a hearty brunch after St. Patrick's Day.
Almond meal, eggs, and cream come together producing fluffy pancakes that are gluten-free, grain-free, and very easy to make!
Oats are soaked in kefir overnight until creamy, then topped with fresh fruits and honey for an easy make-ahead breakfast of bircher muesli.
Cucumber, pineapple, and pear are blended with ginger and a secret ingredient (white beans!) creating a refreshing on-the-go smoothie.
This vanilla-flavored mango and banana smoothie bowl is topped with flaked coconut, goji berries, and chia seeds for a refreshing breakfast.
Steel-cut oats are soaked overnight and then baked with coconut, blueberries, and eggs in this overnight baked oatmeal recipe everyone loves.
Warm flour tortillas are topped with fried egg, Cheddar cheese, tomato, and sour cream in this quick and easy breakfast dish.
Frozen banana and raw cacao powder are combined with almond milk and coconut flakes to become a healthful alternative to ice cream.
A pineapple and carrot smoothie with hemp seeds, ginger, and coconut milk is a hearty and spicy way to start your day.
Have nachos for breakfast with these breakfast nachos! Eggs, chorizo, and cheese over potato chips is a delicious and filling way to start the day.
Banana, mango, and coconut yogurt are blended together in this refreshing smoothie that will have you feeling like you are in the tropics.
Chocolate chips, coffee, and cocoa nibs are baked with oats in this mocha granola, similar to a coffee and chocolate granola found in grocery stores.
This berry chocolate candy bar smoothie is loaded with berries, leafy greens, and a hint of chocolate for a hearty way to start the day.
Matcha green tea powder, pear, and spinach come together in this green smoothie with a protein and caffeine punch.
Spinach, fruit, milk, and honey are blended together in this lean and green smoothie for a great start to the day or between meals.
Omelets made in a muffin tin with egg substitute, spinach, and Cheddar cheese are a skinny, grab-and-go breakfast the whole family will love.
These chia, hemp, chocolate chip oatmeal bars are a vegan, on-the-go snack that adults and kids love.
Apples, pecans, and raisins are baked with oats, butter, and brown sugar creating apple pie granola that tastes just like apple pie.
This 30-Minute Potato Breakfast Bowls recipe is courtesy of Lori Rice, a part of the U.S. Potato Board's Potato Lovers Club Program.
This big batch of gingerbread granola bars is quick and easy to put together, and can be enjoyed as a snack or for breakfast on-the-go.
Gingerbread waffles topped with sauteed pears and vanilla yogurt are a festive brunch item during the holiday season.
This is a simple but indulgent French toast dish you can prepare in advance, then pop in the oven for festive, gingerbread-scented holiday mornings.
Pumpkin butter adds a nice fall twist to traditional pancakes in this recipe for pumpkin butter pancakes the whole family will love.
This hearty granola includes oats, almonds, coconut, and chocolate to make it delicious, with chia, flax, and hemp to make it nutritious.
This unique recipe introduces Champagne to traditional buttermilk pancakes, a delicious way to use your leftover bubbly the next morning.
Banana, spinach, and spirulina are blended together in this Power-Packed Smoothie; a quick and easy way to kick-start your day.
For a quick and easy breakfast or brunch sure to impress, try this dairy-free German Pancake made with spelt flour and coconut milk.
Inspired by a popular video game, this plate of over-easy eggs and pan-grilled watermelon, flavored with fresh parmesan cheese will make a delightful breakfast for you.
A bowl of rice cereal, with cinnamon, coconut, and lightly sweetened, is a great way to start the day.
Peanut butter, strawberries, yogurt, and banana are blended together creating a pb and j smoothie perfect for on-the-go meals for weekdays.
Raspberry cantaloupe smoothie with tofu and soy milk is a creamy and hearty, on-the-go meal for busy mornings.
This banana and spinach smoothie is extra creamy thanks to yogurt added to the mix for a quick and easy, on-the-go breakfast.
Layers of sourdough bread, spinach, soy sausage, and cheese are baked in a mixture of egg and milk for an easy brunch recipe for a crowd.
Layers of whole grain bread, spinach, ham, and cheese bake in a mixture of eggs and fat-free half-and-half in this simple breakfast strata recipe.
Instead of refueling with a sugary sports drink, try this energizing combination of protein-rich cottage cheese, wholesome kale and applesauce.
Healthy meets high energy in a refreshing mango, orange, banana, and cottage cheese smoothie.
This thick smoothie has a rich nutty flavor and is a great quick meal for vegans wanting a calorie-rich smoothie to go.
Start your day off right with this recipe for a power-packed banana coconut breakfast smoothie.
Cranberry-pomegranate juice, oats, flaxseed, milk, and strawberries make up this tasty smoothie that's great to drink on-the-go.
Oatmeal is mixed with eggs, feta cheese, and tomatoes in this baked savory oatmeal casserole for those of us who prefer savory over sweet for breakfast.
Surprise your honey on Valentine's Day morning with this wonderful French toast recipe with strawberries and bananas for garnish!
Pineapple, spinach, berries, and avocado are blended together in this hearty smoothie packed with flavor and nutrients to start your day.
Pineapple, apple, and mint juice is a delicious dairy-free drink and a nice treat when you're on a cleanse.
Packed with vegetables and fruit, this gluten-free and dairy-free green smoothie is a powerful way to start the day.
Fluffy, flavorful, and made with coconut and almond flour, these delicious pancakes may become a new family favorite. They're especially good topped with maple syrup, honey, applesauce, or apple butter.
Eggs, refried beans, and salsa wrapped in a cheesy rice crust make a delicious Mexican-inspired breakfast roll.
Gluten-free rice breakfast bars are packed with nutrition, lightly sweetened with honey, and include currants, peanut butter, and garbanzo bean flour.
Almond chia bars made with powdered peanut butter and chocolate chips are a great on-the-go breakfast or snack for kids and adults.
Pineapple, oranges, and kiwi fruit are blended with green tea and Greek yogurt creating a creamy and fruit-filled smoothie for an on-the-go breakfast.
French toast, bacon, and scrambled eggs are stacked together and topped with maple syrup to create this magnificent breakfast sandwich.
Homemade maple pecan granola with plenty of spiced dried fruit is a crunchy topping for yogurt or great by itself!
The perfectly crisp-on-the-outside and moist-on-the-inside pancakes have a secret ingredient that does all the work: beer!
Barley-oat pancakes, made with barley flour, wheat germ, and banana, are a hearty and fiber-rich way to start your day.
This unique recipe combines eggs with eggnog for a sweet flavor and custard-like texture. Also makes a great french toast batter.
Eggs replace the dough in this deep-dish pizza with fewer carbs. Topped with tomato sauce, meat, and cheese, it makes a filling breakfast!
Smoky broiled eggplant is diced and stirred into scrambled eggs in this traditional Persian dish. Serve warm with flatbreads for brunch!
Strawberries, kiwi, banana, and peaches, plus wheat germ, honey, and ginger make a refreshing and filling jumpstart to your day.
Up your breakfast game with this quick and easy recipe for apple cider syrup; drizzle it over a stack of hot pancakes for a memorable meal.
Packed with vegetables, cheese, and salsa, this savory Mexican-inspired twist on oatmeal is a unique dish for a filling breakfast or brunch.
Buttermilk pancakes with spring onions are topped with chicken and pepper Jack cheese for a savory lunch twist on a breakfast classic.
Hawaiian bread is layered with bananas, brown sugar, and pecans for a decadent bananas Foster French toast casserole ready in a snap.
Pears, Gorgonzola cheese, and bacon are layered in a rich and creamy custard in this savory makeover of bread pudding perfect for brunch.
Tomato sauce, pepperoni, olives, and mushrooms are cooked inside eggs in this quick and easy pepperoni pizza omelet recipe.
This stir-fried medley of brown rice, ham, and Cheddar cheese is easy to prepare and can be adapted to the ingredients you have on hand.
Eggnog, cinnamon, and nutmeg are added to these quick and easy pancakes fit for a fun holiday breakfast.
This recipe makes a yummy smoothie with spinach, banana, strawberry, dates, and coconut water. A healthy start to your day!
This Tex-Mex Eggs Benedict with Grilled Potato Slabs and Avocado-Lime Hollandaise recipe is courtesy of Edible Perspective, a part of the U.S. Potato Board's Potato Lovers Club Program.
Pineapple juice and coconut cream are blended together with ice in this quick and easy pina colada smoothie recipe.
This moringa coconut smoothie, made with bananas, peaches, and almond butter, is a great on-the-go breakfast that will keep you going until lunch.
This mixed fruit smoothie with goji berries and soy milk is a creamy, non-dairy drink to start your day off on the right foot.
Overnight oatmeal pancakes are a great way to jazz up your morning oatmeal in a pancake-form and happen to be sugar-free!
Mango, banana, and raspberries are blended with chia seeds, hemp seeds, and maca powder in this hearty on-the-go smoothie.
Basil is the secret ingredient in this strawberry smoothie that is perfect for breakfast, a snack, or dessert!
This morning fruit bowl provides a healthy meal to start the day, a parfait including Greek yogurt, fruit, oats, chia seeds, hemp seeds, and walnuts.
This acai berry smoothie is great for breakfast or a treat, made with acai pulp, orange juice, and banana.
This fruit juice shake is made with bananas and mango garnished with whipped cream.
Peanut butter and jelly smoothie with a touch of oats and honey is a hearty, liquid-form of everyone's favorite sandwich.
Almond milk, bananas, dates, and almond butter are blended together in this paleo-friendly and just-sweet-enough almond butter smoothie.
Slices of garlic- and herb-seasoned pork sirloin fill in for ham in this delicious variation on a classic, special-occasion breakfast with poached eggs and hollandaise sauce on English muffins.
Gluten-free and paleo-friendly pancakes made with bananas, plenty of sunflower seed butter, and eggs are a crowd-pleasing breakfast.
A berry smoothie is topped with more berries, banana, and granola in this quick and easy smoothie bowl.
Sorghum, brown rice, and millet flour combined with rice milk, applesauce, and banana puree make these pancakes dairy-free and gluten-free.
Creating beautiful and colorful eggs is a rewarding and fun Easter activity for families to do together.
Make a sweet bowl of oatmeal with using the oats in this paleo, grain-free "oatmeal" made with zucchini, eggs, almond milk, and applesauce.
This mocha-flavored smoothie with chia and hemp seeds is served hot for a protein-packed breakfast on-the-go on a cold winter morning.
Make a batch of this cinnamon-scented oatmeal full of dried fruit and seeds, and you'll have enough for feel-good breakfasts all week.
Pumpkin, almond butter, and banana make these flourless pancakes full of sweet flavors, with a light and fluffy texture from coconut flour.
Eggs and egg whites are cooked with kale and mushrooms and topped with string cheese creating a protein-packed power breakfast.
Eggs, mayonnaise, and Cheddar cheese are combined with ground beef, onion and seasonings to make this easy, delicious cheeseburger quiche.
This quick and easy smoothie is packed with colorful fruits and vegetables and blended with matcha green tea powder to energize every sip.
Nutty Romanesco cauliflower florets sauteed with mushrooms and oregano make a delicious filling for this quiche in a puff pastry shell.
Mushrooms and mozzarella cheese and rolled up into homemade tamagoyaki, a sweet and delicate Japanese omelet, in this quick and easy recipe.
Frozen berries are blended with banana, pineapple, and unsweetened tea creating a very berry smoothie perfect for on-the-go breakfast.
These pancakes are for rhubarb season, which is far too short. Fresh-made rhubarb sauce goes in the pancake batter, and is also served on top.
This garden scramble of eggs with white asparagus, onion, bell pepper, and lots of Parmesan cheese makes a great Italian-style brunch dish.
Spinach, tomatoes, carrots, and hot sauce are blended with apples and lime juice in this refreshing and spicy vegetable smoothie.
Spinach and broccoli are blended with grapes, oranges, peaches, and milk in this quick and easy fruit and vegetable smoothie recipe.
This fruit and vegetable smoothie, made with berries, banana, kale, and spinach, is a great way to start your day or drink post-workout.
These easy oat pancakes feature a winning combination of two unique ingredients, jaggery and jackfruit, that will elevate your pancake game.
The simple batter for these traditional Swedish Pancakes from a family recipe is mixed in the blender, perfect for quick and easy breakfast.
These gluten-free waffles made with chestnut flour are light in texture but deep in flavor, perfect for breakfast on a cool fall morning.
Spring greens are blended with banana, pear, walnuts, and grapes in this energy elixir smoothie that is quick and easy to put together.
Sweet and salty come together for an amazing waffle! Everyone in your family will be asking for seconds! A great way to disguise protein as candy!
A puff pastry crust turns a can of Bumble Bee(R) Solid White Albacore Tuna in Water into a special treat for brunch or dinner.
Made with two types of organic sugar, coconut oil, and chickpea flour, this gluten-free zucchini bread is filled with raspberries and pecans.
Fresh blueberries, graham crackers, and dates are blended together with hemp seeds and coconut milk to create a protein-filled smoothie.
This quick and easy smoothie is great for "on-the-go" and made with 6 superfoods: yogurt, spinach, kale, flaxseed, blueberries, and green tea.
The decadent flavor of chocolate-covered strawberries combines with hearty tofu and vanilla soy milk to create this quick and easy smoothie.
These savory cake pops filled with crumbled bacon, scrambled eggs, and shredded cheese are a quick and easy option for a fun brunch potluck.
All your favorite flavors come together in this quick and easy, 4-ingredient smoothie made with bananas, apricots, dates, and almond milk.
Sesame seeds and cashew butter add a nice nutty flavor to this mango and spinach green smoothie that is a great on-the-go breakfast.
Avocado, strawberries, and banana blend with carrot juice and yogurt in this quick and easy smoothie that is great for an on-the-go morning.
A little sweet, a little savory and a lot of delicious. This easy breakfast casserole can even be prepped the night before.
This whole wheat vegan batter made with oatmeal, chia seeds, and coconut oil yields fluffy, chocolaty waffles loved by kids and adults alike.
In this savory take on oatmeal, rhubarb, cinnamon, chia seeds, flax seeds, honey, and coconut oil combine to make a hearty breakfast dish.
This easy oatmeal with just a hint of butter and savory seasoning is a cinch to make when you need a quick, filling breakfast for one.
Bananas and basil are blended with cream and maple syrup creating a sweet and creamy smoothie that is a great breakfast or post-workout snack.
Kale and spinach are blended with pineapple and mango in this refreshing kale smoothie that is a great on-the-go breakfast drink or snack.
This sweet potato and kale scrambled egg recipe is quick and easy to prepare, is colorful, and fits the paleo lifestyle; top with salsa!
Creamy peanut butter mixed with mashed banana and oatmeal is a quick and easy breakfast with no added sugar, great for the whole family.
Small Russian pancakes made with kefir and a touch of sugar are a quick and easy breakfast to make and are great served apples or chocolate!
Pineapple and banana are blended with kefir and apple juice in this sweet smoothie that is an on-the-go drink for breakfast or post-workout.
Amaro is mixed with grapefruit juice and beer in this Italian-inspired beer cocktail with a refreshing finish. Serve as a digestif.
This no-knead bread with sun-dried tomatoes, basil, and garlic is a tasty twist on traditional bread; eat warm or use as a sandwich bread!
A mashed banana adds sweetness and creaminess to this quick and easy vegan oatmeal for one that will become a weekday morning favorite.
This sandwich makes so much sense, we're surprised it's not a classic. Oozing cheese, crispy hash browns and savory chicken sausage. What could be better?
Pineapple, banana, milk, and honey blend up into this quick and easy smoothie that's great for a fruity breakfast beverage on the go.
Waffle cones shaped like taco shells are filled with scrambled eggs, bacon bits, chopped jalapeno peppers, and chives.
These gluten-free, paleo pancakes with coconut flour and coconut milk have a hint of cinnamon and make a hearty and delicious breakfast.
Butterscotch pudding mix gives pancake batter a nice caramely flavor that is perfect for fall brunches; serve with sauteed apples and syrup.
Frozen berries, banana, and almond butter are blended almond milk creating a creamy, on-the-go smoothie that is vegan and paleo-friendly.
This Philly-inspired breakfast cheesesteak piles chicken sausage, peppers and cheese atop thick slices of French toast.
Start your morning right with this trendy savoury oatmeal. Accented with herbs and topped with a hard-cooked egg, this oatmeal will be a hit with the whole family.
Potato pancakes are served alongside pickle juice, a clever makeover to the traditional recipe, in this quick and easy side or brunch dish.
Kielbasa sausage marinated in sugar and soy sauce is cooked until caramelized in this lazy recipe for a Filipino breakfast dish, longanisa.
Slices of white bread replace pancakes in this quick and easy recipe for blintzes stuffed with berry cream cheese and Nutella(R) spread.
Mini pie shells filled with crumbled bacon, shredded cheese, sun-dried tomatoes, and eggs bake up for easy brunch, party, or potluck dishes.
Oatmeal soaked in sucanat, butter, and kefir overnight bakes up into a fluffy and delicious sweet treat for a brunch crowd the next morning.
Mashed bananas are the source of sweetness in these high-protein waffles made with quinoa flour that make for a quick and easy brunch.
Made with a mix of quinoa flour, tapioca flour, ground flax seeds, and potato starch, these pancakes are a gluten-free option for brunch.
This makeover eggs Benedict is quick and easy to whip up, featuring bacon, eggs over easy, and a parsley-Parmesan spread over crispy bread.
Chickpea flour, stevia, egg whites, and nonfat milk keep these light and fluffy cinnamon pancakes free of gluten and low in cholesterol.
Great for breakfast, lunch or dinner. Add cream-style corn to your favorite pancake mix for crisp on the outside, creamy on the inside waffles.
Fill your breakfast bowl with chia seeds, fruit, coconut, and a variety of textures in this quick and easy gluten-free, oat-free treat!
These banana and chocolate chip pancakes with protein powder and cinnamon are a hearty and high-protein breakfast to make for weekends.
Put leftover quinoa and brown rice to good use in this warm breakfast pudding you can top with any fruits or nuts you have on hand.
Chinese-style egg omelets are filled with bean sprouts, chicken, pork, mushrooms, and scallions in this easy foo young recipe for two.
These honey granola breakfast bars, made with oats, wheat germ, dried fruit, and walnuts, are a hearty on-the-go breakfast or snack.
These multigrain and quinoa breakfast pancakes, made with coconut oil, are a quick and easy breakfast with a little extra protein.
These light gluten-free buckwheat crepes can be used for either savory or sweet fillings, and are perfect for an easy gluten-free dessert.
These overnight oats with cocoa, cinnamon, and milk are topped with baking chips, a drizzle of honey, and sliced fruit or nuts and dried fruit.
Full of all-natural ingredients like fruit, nuts and honey, this smoothie bowl will help you start your day on a healthy note.
This easy recipe for overnight oatmeal is made in the slow cooker, perfect for busy fall mornings when you're craving spiced pumpkin dishes.
For a pitcher cocktail that both brunch and dinner guests will hanker for, turn to this renowned family recipe for a killer Bloody Mary.
Toasted rolled oats and pecans are mixed with blueberries, vanilla breakfast drink, eggs, and more and baked until golden brown.
This simple recipe adds bold flavor and bright color to morning eggs with turmeric, Cheddar cheese, and plenty of ketchup (or none at all).
Made with rice flour, tapioca starch, and almond flour, these waffles can be enjoyed by brunch fans avoiding wheat and gluten in their diet.
Boost the volume of your no-cheese breakfast dish and stay true to a paleo diet by cooking up scrambled eggs with a splash of coconut milk.
This Caribbean-inspired coconut bread can be baked as a loaf or muffins and can be served for breakfast, as a snack, or alongside a meal.
Blueberries, peanut butter, protein powder, and milk are all you need to make a pb and j smoothie, a satisfying on-the-go meal or snack.
Black sesame seeds and walnuts give this traditional banana bread a hit of flavor and texture that will quickly become a family favorite.
Milk bread made with 7 simple ingredients you might already have on hand is always a crowd-pleaser for breakfast toast or sandwich bread.
Fruit, coconut water, and Greek yogurt are blended together, poured into a bowl, and topped with chia seeds in this smoothie bowl recipe.
Oats, maple syrup, walnuts, egg, banana, and blueberries are baked together in this quick and easy recipe for breakfast oatmeal squares.
Mix the ingredients for this oatmeal bake the night before and you can bake it off in the morning for a warm, family-friendly breakfast.
This quick and easy sweet bread has no butter or oil, just yogurt, which gives it a moist and spongy texture you can easily customize.
These waffles with glazed maple bacon pieces and pumpkin pie spice make a delicious and hearty breakfast.
Cinnamon-scented pancakes are doused with lemon juice and confectioners' sugar in this quick and easy recipe for a breakfast treat.
These easy and delicious banana pancakes get a nutritional boost from whole wheat flour, ground almonds, flax seeds, and mashed bananas.
Homemade crepes filled with a hot pinto bean and salsa mixture are topped with Monterey Jack cheese to make this easy, Mexican-inspired dish.
Vegan cinnamon waffles made with coconut oil and apple cider vinegar are quick and easy to prepare and a delicious start to the day.
Overnight oats with chai tea latte, vanilla yogurt, honey, and pomegranate seeds make a perfect on-the-go breakfast.
This frosty Creamy Pineapple Drink is a great way to get your daily servings of fruit. Check out this Carnation Breakfast Essentials recipe today!
Go Bananas for this Banana Supreme Shake, a Carnation Breakfast Essentials reader-submitted recipe from Betsy J., of Osceola, NE. Try it today!
These chickpea spinach muffins seasoned with nutritional yeast are great for busy mornings when you need a filling breakfast on the go.
Pumpkin puree, banana, and almond milk with a touch of spice make an easy and delicious, dairy-free breakfast smoothie.
Scotch and honey are mixed with coffee and topped with a lemon-flavored whipped egg white in this Celtic variation of Irish coffee.
Make your morning super, with this superfood smoothie made with chia seeds and Stevia In The Raw.
The batter for these gluten-free chocolate chip pancakes is easy to make in a blender with creamy Greek yogurt, sweet strawberries, and oats.
Eggs, diced ham, and shredded Cheddar cheese nestled into a "bed" of corn bread bake up into this quick, family-friendly brunch dish.
Pop milk, fresh strawberries, and half an avocado into a blender and you'll get this sweet and creamy smoothie with fruity flavor!
These zucchini and cocoa pancakes made with a banana and flax seeds instead of eggs are an easy vegan and gluten-free option for breakfast.
Blueberries, almond milk, bananas, and flax meal are blended together in this paleo and vegan smoothie that will give you energy until lunch.
Scrambled eggs with sausage and bacon are served alongside hash brown potatoes in this copycat version of a Waffle House(R) breakfast.
You can vary the topping of Bircher muesli to your liking, but the key is to let the oats sit in liquid overnight, which makes them easier to digest.
This crustless keto quiche is cooked to perfection in minutes in your Instant Pot(R)! Spinach and creamy Gouda cheese make this main dish ideal for lunch, brunch, or a quick dinner.
Enjoy breakfast, Hawaiian-style, with banana and pineapple pancakes topped with a quick homemade pineapple and brown sugar syrup.
This Western-style omelet filled with ham, scallions, and green bell peppers is a quick and easy option for a hot, balanced breakfast.
Frittata is a great Italian breakfast or brunch dish that can be served warm or cold. This version is made with asparagus and mushrooms for a colorful spring dish.
Pineapple adds a bit of tropical flavor to this classic strawberry banana smoothie made with Almond Breeze.
These yeast-raised buckwheat pancakes have a sour tang that pairs well with homemade sausage. You can reserve some of the batter to start the next batch.
Peanut butter and banana are the stars of this overnight oats recipe that takes a cue from the Elvis Presley sandwich.
Scrambled eggs are topped with a savory-sweet sausage mixture in these quick and easy egg bowls perfect for a breakfast for 2.
Sneak veggies into kids' lunch boxes with this quick and easy crustless zucchini 'quiche' recipe featuring carrots, Cheddar cheese, and bacon.
A delicious vegan breakfast that can be prepared the night before; overnight oats are great if you're pressed for time in the morning.
This keto and low-carb omelet with chanterelle mushrooms and zucchini is garlicky and cheesy and will fill you up for hours.
These whole wheat waffles are made with oat milk for a dairy-free breakfast treat ready in 30 minutes.
Make meal prep extra convenient with these breakfast burritos made of cheesy hash browns, ham, and eggs packed together neatly in a tortilla.
With no carbs, but extra fat from butter and cream, this keto-friendly coffee will fuel you for hours.
If you are looking for a filling and super-nutritious vegan breakfast, try these easy overnight oats with oats, chia seeds, soy milk, and fresh fruit.
A quick and easy vegan breakfast full of vitamins - I prefer to use berry-flavored soy yogurt, but any flavor will do. You can add any kind of fruit topping you like.
Avocado toast was never this savory, with fried egg, barbeque sauce, and mozzarella cheese. A great breakfast or snack.
These easy-to-make egg bites with spinach, potatoes, onion, and bell pepper are baked in muffin cups for the ultimate grab-and-go breakfast.
These breakfast sandwiches are perfect to grab and reheat for a quick on-the-go breakfast. They're fast to make and ingredients can be changed for personal customization.
This beautiful bright pink smoothie bowl is powered by pitaya (dragon fruit), a nutrient-packed exotic fruit! Berries, banana, and pineapple add natural sweetness.
Gluten-free crepes are so quick and easy to make, with just a few basic ingredients from your pantry! Great for either sweet or savory recipes.
Pureed mixed berries are swirled into a steaming bowl of cooked oats to make this chia-berry swirl variation on a breakfast classic.
A creamy spinach Alfredo sauce is the base for this skillet-baked egg dish garnished with crispy bacon and served with golden toast.
Who says vegan breakfasts are boring? This vanilla nut oatmeal recipe is full of flavor from vanilla and cinnamon, and gets creamy from chia.
Save time in the morning with this vegan breakfast granola that's low in sugars, packed with coconut, flax seeds, pumpkin seeds, and raisins.
This sweet and tart smoothie gets its flavor from kefir, frozen berries, almond butter, banana, and honey to start your day off just right.
Arepas are a popular snack served in many Hispanic countries; they're quickly fried on the griddle and topped with cheese, salsa, and butter.
Whip up these griddle cakes for a breakfast that's healthier than pancakes, using old-fashioned oats and oat flour in place of white flour.
Blintzes make a traditional Shavuot holiday breakfast or dessert; these thin rolled pancakes are filled with cheese, raisins, and lemon peel.
Blinis are simple and delicious Russian-style pancakes that are thin like crepes; top these bite-sized treats with something sweet or savory!
Start your morning off right with this cheesy egg breakfast dish, saturated with a nutritiously green medley of arugula, chard, and spinach.
For fool-proof gluten-free crepes, whip up a batter with rice flour and coconut oil and let it chill for an hour before serving up brunch!
These gluten-free buckwheat pancakes will fill you up with flavor and fiber; this quick and easy recipe tweak is great for weekday mornings.
Swedish cream cheese crepes are a real treat on a weekend morning; Swedish pancakes are filled with cream cheese and topped with blueberries.
These heart-shaped pancakes are filled with chocolate which melts as you put the second pancake layer on top - perfect for Valentine's Day.
Dessert crepes are a perfect way to finish off a special meal; they are freshly made and paired with homemade chocolate sauce and bananas.
This sweet potato breakfast casserole is brunch at its best: sage-seasoned eggs thickened with coconut milk, draped over onion and sausages.
Make this sweet potato casserole ahead of time for a satisfying breakfast with layers of turkey sausage, spinach, and seasoned egg whites.
A crowd-pleasing brunch dish, this potato breakfast casserole brings together sweet onion, sausage, Cheddar cheese, eggs, and grated potatoes.
This dairy-free smoothie with dates, oats, almond butter, almond milk, and a banana is powered up with a sprinkle of maca powder.
Start your weekend brunch off right with these quick and easy, dairy-free matcha pancakes made with cashew milk and white chocolate chips.
Crunchy baked chicken over a Belgian buttermilk waffle, drizzled with maple-chicken gravy, is the ultimate sweet-and-savory brunch creation.
This mocha morning breakfast yogurt is loaded with chocolate whey protein, Greek yogurt, and a jolt of caffeine to start your day off right!
These loaded potato waffles are crispy on the outside and creamy on the inside, filled with salty bacon, Cheddar cheese, and green onions!
This country sausage breakfast pizza tops mini prepared crusts with breakfast favorites: homemade sausage gravy, scrambled eggs, and cheese.
Rolled oats, apples, cinnamon, and walnuts combine with almond milk and sunflower butter to make these delicious grab-and-go breakfast bars.
Italian sausage, bread, mushrooms, onions, and eggs are pressed into stuffing waffles that will have you craving post-Thanksgiving brunch!
Serve up these buckwheat hot cakes for a homemade weekend breakfast; every bite is light and fluffy and has a hint of molasses underneath.
Sausage gravy breakfast pizza, a quick and easy twist on sausage and biscuits, is the perfect cheesy addition to any family weekend brunch!
These rich but fluffy chocolate pancakes with chocolate chips are a decadent way to start the morning.
Chocolate pancakes filled with mini marshmallows and walnuts are a delicious rocky road-inspired breakfast treat.
The batter for these fluffy pancakes is mixed in a blender before being cooked to golden perfection on the stove--breakfast is now quick and easy!
Feta, zucchini, and onions are scrambled with eggs to create a delicious yet quick and easy breakfast for one. You don't even need salt, as the feta cheese is usually salty enough.
The key ingredients of these killer keto pancakes are ricotta cheese and almond flour. Who knew satisfying your pancake craving was so easy?
This cold brew coffee recipe guarantees an iced coffee drink that's refreshing without being bitter, and it's easy to make using a French press.
Chef John gives good old-fashioned pancakes a Japanese facelift using the signature egg-white-folding technique for a feathery-light texture.
Browned butter adds a nutty aroma to these almond-coconut flour pancakes that fit into a keto-friendly diet.
Crispy bacon, caramelized onions, and gooey Cheddar cheese star in this fluffy and delicious quiche that makes a perfect brunch, lunch, or dinner.
What better way to enjoy crepes than in cake form? Stack individual crepes into this multi-layered dessert held together with a light strawberry mascarpone cream.
Breakfast is made delicious with this baked potato that's stuffed with bacon, sausage, scrambled eggs, and Cheddar cheese.
A russet potato is stuffed with egg, bacon, Cheddar cheese, and chives before it's baked in the oven for an Idaho sunrise breakfast that's easy and delicious.
A flavorful quick Mexican breakfast or brunch recipe. You can dial the heat up or down with the cayenne. Double the sauce if you like.
Cream of Wheat(R) and buttermilk deliver extra fluffiness to these pancakes, making them a fast family favorite for breakfast or brunch.
Overnight oats is a filling, sweet, and delicious breakfast that gives you energy for the whole day. You prepare it the night before, and it's ready to eat in the morning.
Impress your brunch guests with this pull-apart bubble bread made from individual sweet rolls drizzled in butter and lemon sugar.
Monkey bread gets an upgrade when frozen bread dough is paired with warm, cinnamon-sugar coated apples.
Steel-cut oats are cooked in the slow cooker with apples, almond milk, pumpkin puree, cranberries, and pecans for a delicious breakfast.
This quick and healthy breakfast can be eaten cold or warmed in the microwave. Use any other fresh fruit or berries you like.
This high-protein, low-carb breakfast bowl will keep you full all morning. Feel free to use different veggies, or try it with ham instead of bacon!
All your favorite hummingbird cake flavors in a slightly-better-for-you version! Enjoy this cottage cheese bowl for breakfast or as a light dessert.
Naturally leavened, gluten-free sourdough starter mixed with fine chestnut flour gives this waffle a smooth, smoky flavor accented by a buttery soft inside and a light, crispy shell outside.
Einkorn flour, an ancient variety of wheat, is as versatile as all-purpose flour. This recipes uses apple and cinnamon, but you can add a variety of fruits and nuts for an equally delicious result.
Maple honey ham and Swiss cheese upgrade this take on a classic cafe sandwich. Topped with sliced avocado on an English muffin, it's perfect any time.
This savory puff pastry tart is quick and easy to make - smoked salmon and gruyere cheese are covered with a creamy egg topping with parsley and chives.
Shakshouka is a popular Middle Eastern dish of eggs poached in a spicy tomato sauce, perfect for brunch.
Leftover eggnog is the dairy ingredient of choice in these crispy golden waffles ready in under 30 minutes.
Cooking a gourmet breakfast for your Valentine can be as quick as this 30-minute smoked salmon eggs Benedict recipe with creamy Hollandaise.
Blueberries, cinnamon, and Greek yogurt are great additions to overnight oats. Everything gets prepared the night before to make your morning breakfast easy.
Chia seeds add a little texture to standard overnight oats, softening as the mixture stands overnight. Layer on a delicious banana and almond butter mixture for added flavor.
Here's how to use almond milk to create a smooth, dairy-free sausage gravy that''s super simple but easy to customize to your tastes.
Cinnamony French toast is covered in a cranberry-orange sauce in this dish fit for all holiday brunches.
Cranberry sauce and pistachios top this fancy-tasting but easy breakfast bowl of pureed butternut squash cooked with coconut milk and fall spices in an Instant Pot(R).
Pumpkin puree turns these vegan pancakes orange and adds flavor. Use whatever nondairy milk you prefer. Enjoy with toppings such as nuts or bananas and syrup!
A delicious pancake infused with matcha green tea flavor to give your breakfast a colorful Japanese flair!
Eggs and mushrooms are a great combination. All you need is parsley, lemon, and a bit of cream, and you'll have a great breakfast.
Granola gets a paleo makeover in this easy recipe with almonds, pecans, walnuts, and sesame seeds coated in spiced honey butter.
Upma is a classic Indian hot breakfast dish that is flavored with chilies and ginger and includes nuts.
The next time you whip up some scrambled eggs, try this spiced recipe with Vienna sausage and mozzarella cheese to add a little kick to your morning meal.
Start your day off green with this bacon and egg breakfast salad featuring cucumber, cherry tomatoes, and a creamy avocado dressing.
Whether you're using instant, quick-cooking, steel-cut, or rolled oats, here's how to make the perfect oatmeal in the microwave, Instant Pot(R), slow cooker, or on the stove.
White wine is made into a light punch with strawberries and fresh woodruff. Serve chilled in the late spring and early summer. 
Here's a zesty variation on an old favorite that your guests will look forward to every time they visit. Bacon and chutney are the keys to these flavor packed eggs.
A cherry-and-vanilla smoothie made with banana and flax seed is a hearty, on-the-go breakfast.
Coconut buckwheat pancakes are a quick, easy, and hearty way to start the day. Serve with your favorite toppings!
This three cheese salami frittata is cut into small squares and can be served as a delightful appetizer alongside a nice glass of white wine.
Sweet potatoes and pineapple come together in this tasty breakfast bread. Serve at brunch or take a slice on the go!
Bring some excitement back to breakfast by dressing up your scrambled eggs with rich Asiago cheese, onions, crispy peppers and the robust flavor of Margherita(R) Genoa or hard salami.
Make your own granola that is mostly oats with hints of coconut, peanuts, and seeds for a hearty breakfast cereal.
This is a simple dish of mashed bananas and high-protein cereal cooked in olive oil and intended to be served with whatever non-dairy milk substitute you prefer.
Gingerbread pancakes are served with a lemon sauce in this easy, fast recipe that's perfect for a special brunch.
Corn muffins with diced ham, Cheddar cheese and chives make a great brunch treat or a side with chili or stew.
Autumn flavors of apple and sage are baked with bison breakfast sausage, eggs, and bread cubes in this delicious brunch strata.
This leftover Christmas vegetable mashup with bacon will bubble and squeak in the skillet for you; a traditional Canadian Boxing Day breakfast.
Macadamia nut milk is lightly sweetened with dried apricots and is a tasty dairy-free option for cereal or smoothies.
This hearty Amish breakfast bake is bursting with cheese, peppers, potatoes, and eggs, and is sure to be a hit at your next breakfast gathering.
Hash browns with spinach, scrambled egg whites, and shredded mozzarella cheese make a quick and hearty breakfast for families on the go.
Coconut pancakes made with coconut flour, rice flour, and buttermilk are a tasty, grain-free version of traditional buttermilk pancakes.
A bittersweet raspberry and parsley breakfast smoothie with pumpkin seeds is the perfect way to start your day.
Blend bananas and mangoes with chia seeds, flax seeds, and lettuce to make this energizing vegan mango-banana-chia smoothie.
You won't even taste the spinach in this bright green chocolate and spinach milkshake with peanut butter.
Pumpkin puree and toasted pumpkin seeds are a tasty duo in these double pumpkin pancakes; serve with maple syrup and butter.
Kalenutsco, a kale- and walnut-based smoothie with coconut, is a sweet and filling breakfast or snack to keep you energized during the day.
Coconut flour, xanthan gum, coconut milk, and banana help deliver gluten-free and egg-free pancakes to your breakfast table.
This Parmesan and potato omelet has plenty of seasoning and is quick to prepare for a gourmet breakfast treat.
Spinach, parsley, and avocado are blended together creating a creamy green smoothie to kick-start your day.
Raspberries and apricots blended with honey and Greek yogurt create a perfectly delicious summer smoothie.
Banana-walnut-chocolate chip waffles are a hearty and decadent treat for weekend breakfasts; serve with fresh fruit and Greek yogurt.
This easy recipe brings you a new way to enjoy the fall bounty of fresh pumpkin, mixing it with corn and onion in a savory rice-flour pancake.
Dutch Baby batter is poured over softened apples and brown butter for a delicious autumn breakfast or brunch treat.
This delicious frittata with green peppers, green onions, and smoked ham is drizzled with creamy Philadelphia Cooking Creme, and it's ready to serve in 30 minutes.
Delectable shrimp and vegetables simmer gently in a tomato cream sauce before being served over cheesy cornmeal for a Southern-inspired breakfast fit for company.
A paleo-friendly waffle recipe is full of whey powder for protein and bananas for their sweet flavor.
Persimmons, avocado, kefir, and greens give this hearty breakfast smoothie a colorful boost to your morning.
Bran cereal and whole wheat flour give this raisin-studded quick bread a nutty taste.
Apple cider is spiced like a gingerbread cookie and served warm with slices of orange and lemon in this holiday wassail punch.
Sweet red onion and roasted piquillo peppers flavor a creamy custard baked in a lemon-infused yeast dough base.
An elaborate and special Easter bread consists of braided homemade puff pastry stuffed with almond filling, coiled into rings and baked with Easter eggs and a crisp almond topping. A lot of work, but so worth it. Recipe makes 2 breads.
Buckwheat crepes with cocoa are filled with whipped coconut cream for an elegant dessert. Top with berries, nuts or chocolate if you like.
A basic breakfast staple with a lower-calorie spin. This French toast with mixed berries recipe contains 13% fewer calories and 50% less sugar than the full-sugar version.
Liven up your next ham and cheese omelet with chili crisp, a popular spicy Asian condiment - you won't regret it!
These light and tender lemon ricotta pancakes topped with homemade sweet creme fraiche are a treat you can serve at a gourmet brunch.
Mini waffle pops are topped with white chocolate, coconut, and candied ginger in these adorable treats that are great for birthday parties.
Covered with dark chocolate, roasted peanuts, and flaked salt, these mini waffle pops on lollipop sticks make fun and festive dessert bites.
Oats, chocolate chips, peanut butter, and honey are baked together in these tasty granola cake bars you can eat for breakfast or on the go.
Mango, strawberry, pineapple, and coconut give these blintzes with a creamy cheese filling lots of tropic-a-licious, fruity flair.
Cassava flour, maple syrup, bacon, and coconut milk are the key ingredients in these paleo maple bacon donuts, a sweet grain-free treat!
Banana quinoa pancakes with honey are a great breakfast to prepare on weekdays or the weekend and the whole family will love them.
Whole wheat and quinoa flour give these quick and easy waffles a wholesome whole grain boost that'll start your morning off right.
Eggs, bacon, tomatoes, and potatoes are bound together with cream of chicken soup in this crowd-pleasing Mexican breakfast casserole recipe.
Whole eggs are cracked over a layer of hash browns, bacon, and roasted green chile peppers in this hearty New Mexican breakfast casserole.
These pancakes made with milk and kefir are an easy option for breakfast and so fluffy you can't tell they're made with whole wheat flour.
Coffee, avocado, palm sugar, egg, and coconut oil are blended, creating a creamy coffee smoothie that is a filling on-the-go breakfast.
Homemade waffle cones are quick and easy to make in less than 30 minutes; fill with your favorite ice cream flavors.
Chicken and mushrooms in a creamy egg filling are baked in a crust made with Chicken in a Biscuit(R) crackers in this decadent tart recipe.
Homemade corn dogs made with breakfast sausage are served with a spiced maple syrup dip in this fair food treat your family will love.
This creamy quiche filled with canned tuna and tomato slices is a quick and easy recipe you can make with little advance planning.
These yummy coconut pancakes are lightly sweetened with banana, fortified with flax meal and egg, and quickly whipped up to enjoy anytime.
A minimalist version of banana pancakes, these oat cakes are quick and easy to prepare, and a spread of peanut butter makes them extra yummy.
Dairy-free vegetarian crepes are filled with a vegan "cream" filling and maraschino cherry sauce in this light breakfast or dessert recipe.
These bright purple yam bread rolls, known as ube pandesal in the Philippines, are easy to make with a bread machine's dough cycle.
This rustic larded bread filled with salami chunks and two kinds of cheese is traditionally served on Easter morning in Naples, Italy.
These paleo pancakes use almond flour and tapioca starch; even if you're not on a paleo diet, this recipe can help you avoid white starches.
Try this hearty pancake that's more satisfying than a protein shake; zucchini keeps pancake moist and and gets a veggie into your breakfast!
A quick and easy crab and mushroom omelet makes a great addition to your collection of no-cheese breakfast dish recipes, perfect for brunch.
Double chocolate banana monkey bread is flaky layers of spiced, caramelized, double chocolate goodness that is a sweet, gooey delicacy.
Raw kale is tossed with balsamic vinaigrette, soft-boiled eggs, and crisp bacon in this salad that's a twist on traditional breakfasts.
Babies and toddlers can be picky about food, but they almost all love bananas; adding tofu and a scrambled egg to this dish boosts protein.
This easy monkey bread uses refrigerated cinnamon roll dough and hickory smoked bacon for an amazing breakfast or brunch treat.
Baked eggs, smoked sausage, provolone cheese, spinach, and onions on an English muffin make a tasty, hearty breakfast--or even lunch!
Make this crowd-pleasing casserole for breakfast or brunch with buttery sweet potatoes, almond milk, spinach, and grated Parmesan cheese.
This recipe combines chocolate stout beer and dark chocolate cake mix to yield a thick stack of fluffy pancakes that adults will love.
Ulu, or breadfruit, is a tropical fruit that you can mix into a batter to make fluffy breakfast pancakes that the whole family will enjoy!
This easy and quick autumn-inspired take on a Dutch baby comes together in your blender and includes all your favorite pumpkin pie spices.
This vegan oatmeal contains quinoa, oats, coconut, and cacao nibs (low-carb roasted, coarsely ground cocoa beans) for a chocolaty flavor.
Perfect for a quick and easy, filling breakfast, this smoothie is a creamy blend of cashews, silken tofu, Greek yogurt, and almond milk.
A great way to cook soy chorizo from Trader Joe's(R) is this simple yet filling omelet that gets a nice spice from the vegetarian soyrizo.
Two classics come together to create the best breakfast treat ever.
Start your morning off right with this delicious, quick and easy smoothie packed mango, kale and chia seeds.  Sweetened with Stevia In The Raw!
These gluten-free and lactose-free pancakes are light, fluffy, and delicious and are the perfect breakfast or dessert served with fruit.
This recipe uses flavorful scrambled tofu as a vegan breakfast burrito filling; just add potato nuggets, vegan soy cheese, and vegan sausage.
Filled with mushrooms, peppers, Cheddar cheese, hash browns, and bacon, this delicious breakfast lasagna will be a hit among brunch guests!
All of your favorite breakfast items star in these savory cupcakes with 3 stacked layers of pancake batter, omelet, and breakfast sausage!
These fun, quick, and easy savory breakfast cupcakes are a welcome new way to deliver toast, bacon, eggs, and cheese for your morning meal.
These gluten-free protein pancakes made with coconut flour are easy to make and will disappear off the breakfast table on Sunday mornings.
These pancakes made with bran, chia seeds, and flax seeds are an easy option for a breakfast rich in fiber, great for the whole family.
These peanut butter-packed, bacon-topped breakfast pancakes are a decadent dish that your brunch guests will hanker for time and time again!
These paleo waffles made with coconut flour are a winner: they are grain free, dairy free, and egg free, and they have a delicious flavor!
Loaded with bacon, green bell pepper, and chives, these egg breakfast muffins fit into a paleo diet but don't skimp on the flavor.
This sweet Polish babka, filled with a swirl of orange-flavored cream cheese, will be an impressive centerpiece for your Easter brunch.
Honey and soy milk bread flecked with flax seed is a nice soft bread that is easy to make and the whole family will love it for breakfast.
Cinnamon, turmeric, ginger, dates, and cacao powder are blended with bananas and coconut milk in this creamy vegan superfood smoothie.
Change up your breakfast routine with this fruity oatmeal bake with apple, peach, and blueberries that'll last you through the week.
Fresh cherries, grated coconut, and mixed peel are the star ingredients in this sweet coconut bread recipe, a favorite in the Bahamas.
A pinch of Iranian saffron adds a pop of color and a delicate floral taste to these beautiful braided bread loves perfect for brunch.
Rolled oats, wheat germ, flaked coconut, and dried fruit bake up into this simple no-nut granola perfumed with cinnamon and vanilla.
Start your day with this green power smoothie combining oats, coconut milk, spinach, parsley, apple, honey and lemon.
Fresh peaches, orange juice, milk, yogurt, and oats are blended together for a breakfast that gets you out the door in a jiffy.
These Irish soda bread farls are a quick, no-yeast bread cooked on a griddle using only 3 ingredients. Make for breakfast in under 30 minutes.
You can enjoy breakfast for dinner with this recipe for savory French toast topped with poached eggs, Parmesan cheese, and asparagus.
Spinach and corn are mixed with Gruyere cheese and layered with hummus in this quick and easy, savory crepe recipe perfect for brunch.
This orange sweet bread (vasilopita), traditionally served on New Year's Day in Greece, will fill your home with heavenly smells as it bakes.
Eggs, prosciutto, caramelized onion, and Gouda cheese are layered in these quick and easy cups that are like individually portioned quiches.
Oats, almonds, pecans, seeds, and coconut are baked with honey and cinnamon in this crunchy granola trail mix perfect for hiking or snacks.
Melted ice cream is mixed with flour and sugar in this quick and easy ice cream bread that only requires 3 simple ingredients.
Bok choy, coconut, chia seeds, and ginger are blended with coconut water and banana in this Thai-inspired on-the-go green smoothie.
Weekday breakfasts get a makeover with these quick and easy baked potatoes topped with over-easy eggs, Cheddar cheese, and sriracha sauce.
Quick and easy crepes are filled with a creamy blend of chocolate, cinnamon, and fig jam in this elegant dessert that doubles as breakfast.
Start the new year off right with this detox smoothie made with green tea, spinach, coconut water, and a scoop of vanilla protein powder.
Oats are simmered with saffron and cardamom in this savory porridge that is ready in less than 30 minutes and can be breakfast or dinner.
This tapioca porridge flavored with coconut milk and a raspberry-rhubarb sauce is gluten-free, paleo- and AIP-friendly, and very tasty!
Butternut squash cubes are simmered with millet is this easy savory breakfast porridge that is gluten free, dairy free, and filling.
Flax seeds, soy milk, and tofu make the batter in this vegan French toast recipe that is quick and easy to prepare for breakfast or brunch.
Green veggies meet plump chia seeds in this thick, creamy and delicious green smoothie.
Chocolate sauce oozes out when you cut into these whole wheat waffles with flax and hemp seeds that make for a fun, wholesome brunch.
This is a berry, berry yummy drink for smoothie lovers. Take a look and try the Berry Smoothie recipe from Carnation Breakfast Essentials today!
Looking for a breakfast shake with the great benefits of oats? Try the Carnation Breakfast Essentials(R) Chocolate Oatmeal Shake. This reader-submitted recipe is a satisfying and nutritious start to your day.
Try soy milk with Carnation Breakfast Essentials(R) Light Start(TM) to start off your morning right. Take a look at this Chocolate-Banana Soy Smoothie today!
Chocolate and coffee lovers unite under one shake. Try the Coca Mocha Milk Shake, the quintessential milk shake with an extra pick-me-up!
This shake is a refreshing no-alcohol alternative with all the great taste. Try the Fuzzy Navel recipe from Carnation Breakfast Essentials today!
This delicious Peanut Butter Soy Shake is a Carnation Breakfast Essentials reader-submitted recipe from Amy S., of Wasilla, AK. Try it today!
Taste the tropics in minutes with the flavors of banana, apple, mango and creamy French Vanilla in this delicious Apple-Mango Madness smoothie!
White chocolate chip pancakes are served warm with regular syrup and fresh berry syrup. Toss on some sliced fruit and a few more chips if you like!
This sausage gravy breakfast pizza uses crescent rolls to make a soft crust, overlaid with scrambled eggs, hash browns, sausage, and bacon.
This sausage gravy breakfast pizza makes a filling yet easy brunch, with rich homemade sausage gravy, scrambled eggs, and 2 kinds of cheese.
Ditch instant oatmeal in favor of these trailside apple pancakes you mix up at home and cook in a cast iron skillet once you set up camp.
Refrigerated biscuit dough is easily turned into pull-apart bacon and egg bread in this breakfast recipe sure to wow adults and kids alike.
Crispy cheesy breakfast pockets bring your favorite breakfast foods together in a convenient wrapped form: potatoes, tomatoes, and cheese.
These quick and easy breakfast pockets are croissant dough rolls, stuffed with sausage, cheese, and hash browns, then folded up and baked.
Cubed Hawaiian sweet bread rolls are blanketed with bacon, green onions, eggs, and 3 cheeses to make this simple and delicious bread strata.
Slices of panettone are dipped in an egg-milk-vanilla-wine mixture, dipped again in beaten eggs, then pan fried in butter. Serve with homemade syrup!
Start the day with an easy breakfast pizza, replete with classic breakfast delights such as bacon, chicken sausage, bell pepper, and salsa!
These sensational breakfast creations sandwich ham, cheese, and eggs between cinnamon roll waffles drizzled with orange cream cheese icing.
This versatile quiche with leek, Gruyere cheese, and ham can be easily made vegetarian by omitting the ham - it tastes great both ways.
Bacon roses adorn this deep-dish quiche that's perfect for company, complete with Swiss cheese, Gruyere cheese, mushrooms, and green onions.
Make this diced potato breakfast casserole an easy family favorite, with layers of browned sausage, bell peppers, eggs, and Cheddar cheese.
This delicious low-carb omelet is a classic and versatile meal for two, either for lunch, breakfast or brunch, and so quick and easy to make!
Acai, mango, almond milk, oats, and chia seeds make a fantastic smoothie bowl for 2, just in time to start the day with something delicious.
Baked mushroom chile relleno casserole is easier and lighter than the traditional and just as delicious, maybe more if you love mushrooms.
This vegetarian breakfast casserole recipe is so convenient; use your favorite ingredients and prep it the night before for a great morning.
Almond milk, dulce de leche, banana, and cinnamon are blended up for a delicious, on-the-go smoothie topped with toasted crushed almonds.
If you are looking for a special dessert for your guests, try these dessert crepes with homemade raspberry sorbet and fresh raspberries.
These banana and egg pancakes flavored with cinnamon are a simple, quick, and delicious breakfast treat that are also free of gluten and soy.
These fluffy gluten-free pancakes with a hint of cinnamon and vanilla for extra flavor taste best served with maple syrup and fresh fruit.
Perfect for brunch, these cream cheese crepes ooze with a lemon and mandarin orange cream filling and are topped with a sweet citrus sauce.
These delicious dessert crepes are topped with sweet, savory layers of maple syrup, crispy bacon, and cinnamon for a comforting fall treat!
Keto crepes are quick and easy; you'll love the savory flavor from Parmesan cheese and coconut flour and the rich texture from cream cheese.
Gluten-free pancakes can be very tender without xanthan gum; these filling breakfast cakes are excellent with maple syrup and need no butter.
Flaxseed meal, peanut butter, almond milk, and bananas make for yummy vegan pancakes, perfect for a delicious breakfast or brunch.
Smoked salmon, scallions, and dill come together in this tempting breakfast egg omelet topped with with dollops of sour cream and chives.
Golden brown brioche French toast is stuffed with a deviled egg filling in this brunch dish sprinkled with maple bacon for extra oomph.
This delicious vegetarian spin on eggs benedict pairs poached eggs with savory zucchini fritters and a lemony creme fraiche sauce.
A pancake muffin combo recipe lets you have your muffin and your pancake, too: a great breakfast project for kids on a lazy Sunday morning.
Dress up these whole wheat breakfast crepes with a filling of fresh blueberries and an elegant topping of Greek yogurt and slivered almonds.
Delicious breakfast crepes with strawberry-banana filling are quicker and easier than you might've thought; surprise your family on Saturday.
These scrumptious Nutella(R) crepes bring the essence of Paris to your brunch table, with rich chocolate draped over delicate crepe layers.
These homemade Nutella(R) crepes are filled with a mix of bananas, cream cheese, and Greek yogurt, all drizzled with a rich hazelnut sauce.
These baked chicken crepes, filled with many spices, bell peppers, and 3 different cheeses, are the ultimate satisfying savory brunch dish.
Blini are deliciously thin Russian pancakes that can be filled or topped with anything you like from sweet to savory ingredients. Serve hot.
Made from scratch, these blueberry flapjack pancakes include chia seeds, taking a quick and easy breakfast recipe and pumping up the flavor!
Serve up fluffy flapjack pancakes for a delicious breakfast or brunch using common ingredients from your pantry: a quick and easy favorite!
These flapjack protein pancakes, enriched with low-fat cottage cheese and milk, are a tasty whole wheat breakfast that's so quick and easy!
Whip up these flapjack protein pancakes as an energizing workout snack that offers a delicious dose of egg whites, oats, and protein powder.
These blintzes are thin pancakes, like crepes, stuffed with a sweet cottage cheese filling and perfect as a sweet or savory brunch addition.
These scrumptious Swedish pancakes are made from a light and simple batter and rolled with a tart lingonberry topping for a quick breakfast!
Yes, vegan Swedish pancakes are possible and delicious when made with spelt flour, soy milk, vegan butter, maple syrup, and vanilla extract.
A bit larger than canape-sized blini, these authentic Russian pancakes are also easy to make, filled with hearty sauteed beef and onion mix.
This honey-baked ham is cooked at low temperature for hours, delivering a glazed and tender ham that can be served for breakfast or dinner.
This bacon and egg stuffed sweet potato is a perfect brunch item that will surely impress your guests but it's easy to make and so delicious.
Vegan French toast with a Mediterranean flair is quick and easy with this recipe using soy milk, flour, nutritional yeast, and cinnamon.
Homemade panettone is sliced and layered with tuna, olive tapenade, and ham to make this savory panettone sandwich sure to impress guests.
This crispy, crunchy mix of oats, nuts, and seeds is a savory take on granola spiced with thyme, oregano, and a pinch of red pepper flakes.
Grab a blender and crepe pan to make these quick and easy 4-ingredient vegan crepes with just flour, oats, soy milk, and maple syrup.
This green smoothie is made with kefir, a fermented dairy food, plus avocado, blueberries, cucumber, and banana for a nutritious treat.
Boost your breakfast with this easy keto coffee blended with coconut oil, egg, and grass-fed butter for a super frothy, protein-rich drink.
Skip the famous coffee shop and make your own sous vide egg bites - velvety appetizers packed with roasted bell peppers and creamy cheeses.
Banana bread gets a tropical update with the addition of crushed pineapple and flaked coconut in this moist, easy-to-make breakfast bread.
Poached eggs are served over a spicy North African-inspired sauce of sausage, tomatoes, red chile, and bell peppers.
This special Russian cheese torte layers chicken, mushroom, and cream cheese between layers of crepes filled with cheese, carrots, and dill.
Russian oladi are similar to American pancakes, but are made with kefir and pan-fried in oil, which produces a beautifully crunchy edge.
This delicious moist pumpkin bread is made with raw sugar and no eggs or milk, making it an easy vegan quick bread for breakfast or snack.
You can use this crustless quiche recipe as a base; add any sauteed veggies, meats, cheese, or herbs to get the flavor profile you like!
Topped with whole eggs, crispy bacon, and cottage cheese, this savory, cheesy pizza will be a hit on your breakfast or brunch table.
Make this tasty, gluten-free pastry from scratch in this simple and easy gluten-free version of the traditional French quiche Lorraine.
Crispy brown fingerling potatoes are topped with homemade sausage gravy, cheese curds, and pickled peppers to make this deliciously decadent brunch dish.
Swap regular old crust for colorful bell pepper cups to make this low-carb quiche filled with eggs, Greek yogurt, avocado, cheese, and green chiles.
These fun breakfast bruschetta are easy, yummy bites you can customize in endless ways; they're sure to be a hit with kids or adults.
Balanced between creamy and spicy, this sausage omelet is a satisfying breakfast featuring Mexican spices, bell peppers, and mozzarella cheese.
Here's a quick and easy veggie omelet recipe bursting with bell peppers, fresh mushrooms, turkey bacon, and cheese, flavored with Creole seasoning.
No need to worry about a picture-perfect breakfast when you enjoy this busted-up veggie omelet full of mushrooms, spinach, onion, and tomato, topped with melted mozzarella cheese.
This egg white omelet of ham, spinach, and Monterey Jack cheese is jazzed up with fragrant herbs and spicy red pepper flakes.
Make a tall, fluffy stack of Greek yogurt pancakes for breakfast and watch how quickly they disappear.
Make ultra-dense carrot cake pancakes with Greek yogurt, oats, and vanilla protein powder for a quick breakfast with a boost!
Ham and cheese turn a simple omelette into a filling breakfast or a fun breakfast for dinner choice. Fresh chives add color and extra flavor.
This delicious omelette for 2 is cooked in one pan. Italian herbs, chervil, basil, sunflower seeds, flax seeds, and Gouda cheese add extra flavor.
Hash brown potatoes form the base of these quick and hearty bacon potato cakes topped with ham steak, fried eggs, and avocado.
Slather spicy homemade Pimento cheese onto these bacon and egg sliders for an easy and truly mouthwatering breakfast.
Start your day with this unique breakfast bread pudding of egg-soaked biscuits baked with sausage, white Cheddar cheese, mushrooms, and parsley.
A quick and deliciously unique breakfast idea, these naan pizzas are topped with sausage, thinly sliced potatoes, and a creamy cheese sauce.
This satisfying, Italian-inspired stromboli is loaded with breakfast favorites such as ham, sausage, eggs, roasted peppers, and Provolone cheese.
Top toasted brioche with whipped chocolate-hazelnut spread, caramelized bananas, and crispy bacon for an over-the-top brunch dish!
Oatmeal gets the Italian treatment in this quick and easy recipe flavored with fresh citrus, ricotta cheese, and honey.
These oat bars studded with cranberries, sliced almonds, and ground flax seeds make for a great on-the-go snack, with no baking required!
Oats are blended into a satisfying smoothie with fresh ginger and mixed frozen berries in this quick and easy breakfast recipe.
Low in fat and high in fiber, these whole wheat chocolate chip cookies are a great on-the-go breakfast alternative to packaged oatmeal bars.
This easy make-ahead recipe makes filling, grab-and-go omelet muffins full of cheese, spinach, onion, and bacon.
Throw together this Mediterranean 3-cheese omelet with dollops of ricotta, mozzarella, and Cheddar, plus cherry tomatoes and fresh herbs.
Sweet, spiced almond butter is stirred into hot oats in this easy breakfast recipe garnished with chopped apple and almonds.
Orange zest, chopped dates, and spices add a gourmet touch to this oat bowl garnished with yogurt and chopped pistachios.
Piping hot oatmeal is sprinkled with pumpkin seeds, almonds, pecans, chocolate chips, and cranberries to make these delish trail mix oats for one.
Spirulina powder adds a hit of nutrients to this green glow smoothie bowl, a satisfying way to get your greens.
This is my version of the Italian tart with chard and raisins. The original is made with pine nuts, but I prefer to use walnuts instead. Feel free to use either.
This Instant Pot(R) breakfast casserole is a nutritious mixture of eggs, spinach, Swiss cheese, and bacon cooked inside steel insert pans immersed in water.
Crescent roll dough forms the crust on this hearty breakfast pizza layered with eggs, hash browns, and sausage.
Scrambled eggs, bacon, and tomatoes top this pesto breakfast pizza that's easy to make the night before!
Egg white muffins full of spinach, Cheddar cheese, and corn are an easy make-ahead option for breakfast, and they freeze well to boot!
Frozen spinach, canned mushrooms, and shredded mozzarella are layered into these single-serve egg muffins for an easy breakfast or brunch option.
These baked egg muffins are keto-friendly and make a quick breakfast or brunch that satisfies without weighing you down.
Simple chorizo, pepper Jack cheese, and cilantro keto-friendly egg muffins are perfect for a quick breakfast, or freeze and keep them for later!
Four kinds of seeds - including black sesame - make an appearance in this delicious spiced granola sweetened with honey, dried fruit, and jam.
This vegetarian tomato and basil tart is a feast and can be served for breakfast, lunch, or dinner with just a salad or some bread.
Here's the perfect recipe for a special Halloween breakfast; as a bonus, these pumpkin pancakes are quick and easy to whip up.
These vegan pancakes take on a hint of fall with the savory goodness of pumpkin, cinnamon, and pecans!
All of the flavors you love in a bacon cheeseburger come together in this hearty breakfast omelette.
Here is an under-an-hour recipe for an Asian-inspired, veggie-rich, breakfast stir-fry that could also work as a main dish lunch or dinner for 1.
Whip up a batch of homemade pancakes to kick off your weekend brunch with this quick and easy, no-frills recipe that works every time.
This non-alcoholic, totally vegan pina colada is quick and easy to make, functioning as both a breakfast smoothie and light tropical dessert.
Made with coconut milk, pineapple chunks, and brown sugar, this big batch of steel-cut oats brings pina colada flair to any weekend breakfast.
This is the authentic Mexican version of huevos rancheros, with fried eggs over fried tortillas layered with refried beans and tomato sauce.
This traditional Italian recipe of eggs cooked in a rich homemade tomato sauce with olives, capers, and anchovy makes a very tasty breakfast or brunch.
Brown sugar caramelizes onto thick-sliced bacon in this quick, easy recipe that produces a mouthwatering sweet and savory treat!
Smoothie bowls are a great vegan breakfast option that is gluten free and lactose fee. Try experimenting with different berries, nuts, and seeds.
This moist strawberry bread is packed with fresh berries, oats, whole wheat flour, and yogurt for a fruity yet satisfying breakfast or snack.
Famous coffee chain copycat egg bites recipe for the Instant Pot(R) includes cheese, green onion, red pepper, and spinach.
A nutritious addition to any lunch box, these mini frittatas are packed with enough eggs, Cheddar cheese, tomato, and ham to keep kids going!
Oat milk and yogurt add a twist to the classic egg filling in this unique quiche with ground chicken, mushrooms, and leeks.
Use an air fryer to make this crispy, tasty potato hash featuring bell peppers and jalapenos with Tex-Mex seasoning.
These flavorful huevos rancheros with refried beans, tomato, avocado, and cheese are an easy way to satisfy your morning hunger.
With quinoa and cottage cheese, this hearty bowl accessorized with fruit and chia seeds is a high-protein choice for breakfast or a snack.
This high-protein breakfast contains everything an athlete needs to start off their day, including a good balance of carbohydrates and fiber.
This delicious breakfast porridge packs a high-protein punch that will leave you feeling satisfied until lunch time.
Acai is a superfood from Brazil. It has a slightly bitter taste, so it is best if combined with sweet fruits like mango, raspberry, and banana, such as in this delicious smoothie bowl.
A tasty combination of zucchini and fresh herbs goes so well with salty Halloumi cheese in this easy frittata. To make a frittata for 4, simply double the ingredients and use a larger frying pan.
Chinese okra, asparagus, and tomatoes give new meaning to scrambled eggs for breakfast in this easy 10-minute vegetarian recipe.
Simply bake these ham and cheese egg bowls in muffin cups for a quick and easy nutritious breakfast that goes where you go!
Pancake sandwiches with egg and cheese are great make-ahead breakfasts you can grab and go.
This vegetarian remake of the classic overnight breakfast casserole features mushrooms, herbed stuffing, and plenty of cheese!
Chilaquiles are a great way to use up the last of those blue corn tortilla chips and that leftover green salsa; top with shredded cheese and sour cream for a quick breakfast.
Overnight oats are a satisfying vegan breakfast that can easily be tweaked by adding different fruits, nuts, or flavorings. Chia seeds add nutrients and are filling.
This is a paleo pancake that comes close to the original - it is gluten free, holds its shape, and has the texture you are expecting from pancakes
Try this technique for fluffy Japanese pancakes made with a thick batter that you can quickly prepare before breakfast using simple pantry ingredients.
Made with almond milk, protein powder, and a homemade blueberry syrup, these pancakes are vegan and packed with protein.
Try these vegan protein pancakes topped with homemade apple syrup the next time it's just the two of you for breakfast!
A quick brunch idea, this simple souffle pancake starts on the stove like any regular pancake before it's transferred to the oven to puff up.
These breakfast burritos featuring country gravy are perfect for feeding a family and super cheap to make with bulk bacon, frozen turkey sausage, and Tater Tots(R).
This grapefruit smoothie is a perfectly perky marriage of oats, banana, rice milk, and yogurt with juicy kiwi, blueberries, and grapefruit!
This refreshing smoothie with banana, pineapple, and avocado is a beautiful color thanks to the addition of raw beets.
This kale and beet smoothie features blueberries, flax, chia, matcha, and pure cranberry juice for a clean way start your day or fuel your workout.
Coconut oil, avocado, and spinach make this a delicious and creamy detox green smoothie, perfect for breakfast or just a quick keto snack on the go.
Italian sformato is a mixture of a savory flan and a souffle made with a lot of beaten eggs. This version is made with asparagus.
Start the day with this quick and easy acai bowl made with pineapple, mango, and chia seeds. Made in just minutes and totally ideal for Paleo and vegan diets.
Here's the best keto smoothie on the internet: a no-fail, super-green blend of avocado and spinach, boosted with MCT oil, coconut milk, and vanilla powder.
Eggs baked on a bed of asparagus are perfect for a quick brunch. Serve with toasted bread for dipping and you'll have a delicious breakfast.
All ingredients go in the slow cooker at night, and you'll have delicious vegan overnight oats flavored with pumpkin puree ready in the morning!
If you're looking for a grain-free breakfast option, this hearty granola loaded with crunchy nuts and seeds is the perfect way to start your day.
This vegan porridge is made with almond milk; polenta and almond meal replace the traditional grains and keep it gluten free.
Poached eggs and chorizo stew form this fusion shakshuka, where Mexico meets the Middle East for brunch, or when breakfast meets lunch!
Treat brunch guests to this breakfast bake of ground pork, bacon, peppers, and mushrooms surrounded by layers of egg and cheesy rice.
Get ready to impress with these unique pineapple pancakes stuffed with fresh pineapple rings and full of coconut flavor.
These coconut and pineapple pancakes will instantly turn your morning into a Hawaiian island getaway and are sure to become a weekend brunch hit.
Introduce bacon to your okonomiyaki for a delicious Americanized twist on the savory Japanese pancake loaded with cabbage, eggs, and soba noodles.
Made with kale, mushrooms, tofu, and nutritional yeast, this vegan alternative to quiche is easy to make and full of flavor.
Blend this vegan pancake batter overnight and cook up your batch the next morning for a quick breakfast the whole family will appreciate.
These easy vegan pancakes pass the test for fluffy deliciousness and are ready to top with your usual favorites.
The goodness of oatmeal meets the coolness of a smoothie in this morning mash-up. Have fun with the garnishes and look for tasty in-season fruits.
You can use your rice cooker to prepare this simple overnight oatmeal with kefir, dried fruit, and nuts that will be a hit with toddlers.
Chia seeds thickened with water are the binder in this vegan pumpkin bread that uses spelt and rice flour for a festive treat in the fall.
Crisp goat cheese potato pancakes perched on top of sausage patties are topped with poached eggs in this restaurant-quality brunch recipe.
Cranberries, raspberries, and oranges are blended with vanilla almondmilk, chia seeds, and protein powder for a nutritious on-the-go breakfast or snack.
Potatoes, eggs, sausage, spinach, and Cheddar cheese combine in this easy Italian casserole that makes for a comforting, delicious breakfast.
Flour tortillas are stuffed with scrambled eggs, Cheddar cheese, diced green chilies and Jones Canadian Bacon. Top with sour cream and salsa.
Quinoa is simmered with dark spiced rum, raisins, and cinnamon in this simple and delicious porridge recipe you can serve hot or cold.
Perfect for brinner (breakfast for dinner), each of these nutritious bowls is packed with all-natural chicken sausage, fresh veggies and a baked egg.
Banana, berries, fresh apricots, chia seeds, and protein powder blended with almondmilk make a quick and filling breakfast or snack.
Pea and basil pesto spread over toasted bread slices is topped with a fried egg--great for breakfast, lunch, or dinner.
This cheesy bread pudding with sausage and sun-dried tomatoes is an unexpected way to use pumpkin for a delicious fall breakfast.
Salmon is dry-brined in brown sugar and kosher salt then smoked in this easy DIY recipe perfect for a party appetizer or bagel brunch.
Fried polenta 'buns' hold together breakfast sausage, scrambled eggs, tomatoes and Asiago cheese in these savory sliders.
This easy pancake recipe with almond milk, lemon juice, coconut oil makes for an easy dairy-free and gluten-free breakfast option.
Oats, flax seeds, brown rice, and raisins soak overnight in soy milk in this muesli recipe that makes for a cold and creamy breakfast.
Light and fluffy spiced pumpkin pancakes topped with cinnamon syrup and Reddi-wip are full of autumn flavors.
No need for caffeine, this spicy breakfast will kick start your day and get you moving full speed ahead.
This Egyptian porridge, belila, made with chewy and tender wheat berries, hot milk, nuts, and cinnamon is a warm, comforting breakfast.
Spiralized red potato piles are topped with sausage in these clever hash brown patties that are a simple but delicious breakfast side dish.
Apriplum (a hybrid of apricot and plum) adds a unique taste to this healthy strawberry and Greek yogurt smoothie that is quick and easy.
This quick and healthy hemp seed, flaxseed meal, and oat granola is sweetened with honey and flavored with almond and vanilla extracts.
Great for breakfast or an after-school snack, these quick and easy no-bake bars are made with soy nut butter and agave and are wheat-free.
Cauliflower rice forms a low-carb crust in this creamy, cheesy breakfast pie topped with eggs, sour cream, vegetables, and Cheddar cheese.
Spice up your egg breakfast sandwich with some peppers, ham, and sweet peas.
This eggplant, or aubergine, quiche is made with ham, mozzarella cheese, chopped basil, and eggs for a fresh twist on a brunch favorite.
A great way to use leftover steak or roast! This recipe combines beef, egg and spinach on a thin sandwich roll.
A delicious coconut quick bread made with all things coconut; everything from the flour to the water comes from this tasty, versatile plant.
The smoky, nutty flavor of chestnut flour allows these easy gluten-free and wheat-free crepes to complement both savory and sweet fillings.
Made with ricotta cheese and fresh lemon juice, these quick and easy gluten-free waffles are topped with a crowd-pleasing blueberry sauce.
Start off the day with waffles, caramelized apple slices, and creamy yogurt--it takes just minutes!
Made with buckwheat, chia seeds, vanilla, and cinnamon, these overnight oats are for anyone who wants a delicious and healthy breakfast.
Ripe apples topped with cinnamon and walnuts and sweetened with honey are baked into an oatmeal crumble for a filling one-dish breakfast.
This easy egg and veggie scramble is ultra-versatile as you can use any mashed or pured veggies your baby loves to eat. Here, we've used a delicious and nutritious combo of pured peas, carrots and butternut squash.
Rice cereal and apples are some of the best first foods for babies, and when mixed with a mashed hard-boiled egg it makes for a nutrient-packed breakfast your baby will love.
Your guests can customize individual bowls of this simple and comforting Khao Dom Pla soup made with white fish, rice, and Chinese broccoli.
Applesauce, vanilla, cinnamon and cooked brown rice bring extra flavor and richness to these delicious pancakes.
Boost your protein intake with this delicious smoothie. It contains 23g of protein per serving!
One of our favourite things about bananas is how convenient and easy-to-prepare they are. Simply peel, dice and mash very well -no steaming or boiling required! This easy recipe combines egg with mashed banana and a pinch of nutmeg for a yummy and healthy meal. Using spices and herbs in your baby's food is a great way to offer interesting flavours to enhance your baby's experience with new tastes. Speak with your paediatrician if you have any questions about when you can introduce spices to your baby's diet.
High in vitamins A and K, fibre-filled broccoli is both healthy and filling. This delicious scramble combines broccoli and eggs for a taste-bud friendly meal for baby.
Peaches are rich in vitamin C, vitamin A, and potassium, and their mild, sweet flavour makes them an ideal first fruit. Your baby will love this winning combo of egg, peaches and banana.
Cheese is an excellent food for babies. It's packed with calcium and it provides protein, vitamin A, D, and B12 and can be introduced at around 6 to 9 months.
Homemade pear puree is sweet, filled with fibre, and rich in vitamin C. When scrambled with egg and baby oatmeal, it makes a protein-packed and nutrient-rich food for your baby.
This peachy mango smoothie is refreshing thanks to cucumber and unsweetened tea added to the mix and yogurt giving it a creamy texture.
These muffin-size egg bakes made with ground turkey, enoki mushrooms, and yellow bell peppers are a high-protein breakfast or lunch option.
Bright green Romanesco cauliflower has a delicate nutty taste that shines through this cheesy Italian quiche made with mascarpone cheese.
Fluffy whole grain pancakes drizzled with honey and topped with fresh fruit.
An apple stuffed French toast recipe with maple-flavored syrup, Granny Smith apple slices and sausage patties--perfect as a breakfast for dinner option.
Crepe recipe layered with creamy peanut butter, chocolate-flavored hazelnut spread and sliced bananas.
A creamy matcha latte made with vanilla soy milk and agave syrup is topped with fluffy whipped coconut cream in this refreshing vegan drink.
Low-carb baking mix and sugar substitute make these quick and easy waffles a suitable breakfast for someone watching their carb intake.
Eggs and Pacific saury are simmered in a mirin-soy sauce broth in this quick and easy Japanese dish best served as a side at lunch.
This granola is not just for breakfast, it'll also satisfy any sweet tooth; with coconut, macadamia nuts, and raisins, it tastes like dessert.
Hearty granola made of spelt flakes, oats, hemp seeds, and almonds is a superfood breakfast cereal that is made primarily on the stovetop.
The tomato pancakes, made with tomato juice, ham, and cheese, are a savory version of pancakes that will add a new tasty element to brunch.
Boost your protein intake with this delicious smoothie. It contains 26g of protein per serving!
Boost your protein intake with this delicious smoothie. It contains 22g of protein per serving!
This recipe could not be easier and uses only two simple and pure ingredients: eggs and either breast milk or formula.
Make a vitamin-rich and flavourful recipe to feed your baby who is just starting to eat solid foods: A simple sweet potato scramble.
Latkes, sausage, Cheddar cheese, and blackberry jam and are topped with an egg in this latke breakfast sandwich you'll need to eat with a knife and fork.
A thick acai, banana, and orange juice smoothie is served in a bowl made of a fresh papaya and topped with granola and bananas makes up this acai papaya bowl.
This Hash Brown Tostadas recipe is courtesy of A Communal Table, a part of the U.S. Potato Board's Potato Lovers Club Program.
Make amazing potatoes with this healthy dish: Rainbow Potato Pancakes. With a combination of russet and purple potatoes, you can create this savory treat at home in under 20 minutes!
Make a big batch of this muesli filled with oats, nuts, and seeds to sprinkle on top of yogurt for a hearty breakfast all week long.
Get your holidays off to a perfect start with a delicious bacon waffle bake with Smithfield(R) bacon.
Omurice, a Japanese omelet filled with fried rice and vegetables, is a quick vegetarian meal to prepare for Meatless Monday.
Serve this crustless quiche inspired by the flavor of Thanksgiving stuffing as an appetizer, or over a bed of greens as a main dish.
This breakfast bowl is a healthy, balanced meal in itself with oatmeal, kale, and egg and seasoned with harissa to make it full of flavor, too.
Make a big batch of this Mighty Granola packed with oats, amaranth, seeds, nuts, and dried fruit and you'll be set for breakfast for weeks.
These pancakes made with freshly milled oats, buckwheat, and flax seeds are soaked overnight with kombucha for a whole-grain breakfast.
These pancakes are made with rice flour, coconut milk, and coconut oil for a coconut-flavored version of everyone's favorite morning quick bread.
Cream cheese makes this salmon and asparagus quiche extra creamy and is a delightful, savory touch to breakfast or brunch.
Baked oatmeal, made with vegetable oil and soy milk, is egg-free and dairy-free and great for a vegan lifestyle or if you happen to be out of eggs!
Coconut oil and honey bring a sweet and savory element to this ginger coconut granola. The crystallized ginger gives a nice spicy kick!
This beet, carrot, almond, ginger, and spirulina smoothie is packed with flavor and will leave you feeling refreshed.
Boiled eggs, coconut milk, and a variety of spices combine in this American version of Indian kulambu, a delicious breakfast meal.
Walnut flour and almond flour replace the traditional wheat flour in these nutty, gluten-free, and grain-free waffles.
For those days you don't feel like yogurt, this cottage cheese bowl is sure to hit the spot! Play around with different fruits and toppings.
This recipe for the heartiest, most wonderful whole grain waffles includes a secret ingredient - aquafaba, otherwise known as canned chickpea liquid.
Easy to throw together the night before, and requiring little time or energy in the morning, this kefir-soaked baked oatmeal is great for busy breakfast makers.
Start celebrating St. Patrick's Day at breakfast with these wholesome buttermilk-oat pancakes tinted a bright green.
Your family will love this easy vegetarian quiche Florentine filled with fresh spinach, mushrooms, and plenty of Swiss cheese.
Made with matzo farfel instead of flour, this quiche is great for breakfast, lunch, or dinner during the Passover holiday.
This four ingredient smoothie with sunflower seed butter can satisfy a chocolate craving in a healthier way. Feel free to add ice if you want a thicker smoothie.
Made in a mini muffin tin, these cute little low-carb egg-white frittatas make a perfect portion-controlled buffet or party food.
Try this quick-and-easy dairy-free oatmeal made with almond milk. Raspberries add sweetness and color - why not surprise your loved one on Valentine's Day with this pink oatmeal?
Here's an easy, family-friendly, scrambled egg recipe that uses milk and includes bacon bits, giving you fluffy, moist eggs every time!
Components of a popular candy bar come together for fun, chocolaty overnight oats you can make the night before.
With this simple green smoothie recipe, you'll get your fruit and veggie servings before heading out the door.
Fonio grains are cooked with dried fruits then topped with coconut, cinnamon, and nuts to make this nutritious breakfast porridge.
Egg whites and cottage cheese bring the protein to these low-carb breakfast muffins that you can whip up in 30 minutes.
Try this quick-and-easy, healthier-yet-tasty, on-the-go breakfast of dairy-free overnight oats made with almond milk.
Using your slow cooker is an easy way to enjoy steel-cut oats without hovering over the stove for an hour. Freeze leftovers in individual servings for a quick weekday breakfast.
These overnight oats are packed with vanilla protein powder, peanut butter, chia seeds, and yogurt without any added sugars or sweeteners.
This fun-to-make version of monkey bread is covered in cinnamon sugar and a sticky glaze for a sweet breakfast treat warm from the oven or the next morning.
POG juice is an acronym for passion fruit juice, orange juice, and guava nectar combined into an amazingly refreshing tropical drink! Serve well chilled.
These mini vegetarian frittatas filled with chard, scallions, and mushrooms are a good option for a light brunch or dinner.
These egg white bites with red bell pepper, spinach, and sharp Cheddar cheese look a little like mini pizzas and are a great breakfast or easy grab-and-go snack.
Gather friends and family around the brunch table for these delicious chocolate waffles made with Ghirardelli chocolate chips.
This is a take on a typical quinoa breakfast or brunch bowl with avocado, roasted sweet potato, egg, cilantro, and a potato chip crunch topping.
Sourdough starter adds lift and tang to these pancakes filled with fresh apple slices and ground cinnamon.
Instead of discarding excess sourdough starter, try using it in this recipe for sweet or savory golden crepes.
These light and scrumptious buttermilk pancakes are quick and easy to make with sourdough starter.
Hit a brunch home run with the kids when you make these whole grain pancakes with apple, banana, and hints of cinnamon, nutmeg, and ginger.
Even without butter or egg, these low-cholesterol pancakes are tender on the inside and crispy on the outside.
Tsoureki is a favorite Easter bread for Greek and non-Greek people alike; try this recipe for a unique holiday bread.
Longaniza is a Mexican sausage, similar to chorizo, that tastes great when added to scrambled eggs in this quick microwave breakfast dish.
A savory twist on your classic breakfast of oatmeal, oats upma is flavored with classic Indian spices.
Heavy on protein and a bit of fat, this meal is similar to the Turkish dish menemen, and tastes great any time of day.
Try these delicious einkorn pancakes made with buttermilk for a healthier breakfast; einkorn flour contains higher levels of minerals and protein than typical wheat flours.
Chilaquiles are a quick and easy brunch item with scrambled eggs, salsa, cheese, and tortillas. They can easily be scaled up and down to feed more people.
Migas is an easy Mexican breakfast dish that everybody loves. Eggs are scrambled with chorizo, torn tortillas, and vegetables. A great brunch idea for Cinco de Mayo.
Homemade dough rounds are topped with a mixture of za'atar and olive oil in this authentic recipe for Lebanese mana'eesh.
Looking for a unique keto-friendly appetizer? Try this recipe for a creamy low-carb blue cheese souffle served in individual ramekins.
The unique Japanese delicacy called natto, made from fermented soybeans, is here cooked into a delicious omelette.
Tahini teams up with fresh mint and chocolate to make this shake slightly nutty, oh-so creamy, and not too sweet.
This individually-sized pumpkin spice cookie is packed with oats, powdered milk, and soy protein isolate--all the makings of a protein-rich breakfast.
These scrambled eggs are flavored with salsa and Cheddar cheese and as a bonus, they're another way you can sneak more zucchini into your meals.
Sun-dried tomatoes, onion, and Italian herbs add savory depth to this big batch of fluffy scrambled eggs.
Oats are optional in this pecan, date, and pumpkin seed granola with a sticky, toffee-like consistency.
Waffles made with almond meal, heavy cream, and ghee will satisfy your craving for your breakfast favorite while meeting your keto diet requirements.
This is a one-dish omelette covered in layers of bacon, mozzarella cheese, and Italian herbs with a pizza dough crust.
For anyone who loves Dr. Seuss's book 'Green Eggs and Ham,' try this yummy scrambled eggs recipe with prosciutto and pesto.
This is a wonderful scrambled egg recipe if you have leftover cooked salmon from dinner. Paired with pesto, eggs, and cheese you'll have a breakfast fit for kings.
This is a great, quick breakfast smoothie bowl and a great reason to keep bananas in your freezer for just such an occasion!
Little hands-on time goes into making this simple fig and raisin bread, which takes about 3 hours to rise before it's shaped into a batard, proofed, and baked for a quick 20 minutes.
This spicy quiche with turkey breast, jalapeno peppers, and mushrooms makes a satisfying Christmas main course whether it's for dinner or brunch!
Turn leftover turkey into a quiche for brunch with Cheddar cheese, onion, and a crispy sweet potato crust.
Any type of milk, dairy or non-dairy, can be used for this skinny white chocolate-coconut latte made with 2 types of sugar-free syrups. You will still have a delicious coffee drink.
Spicy Mexican poached eggs in a tomato sauce are an amazing change from the regular old poached eggs or rancheros!
These tasty sourdough and banana pancakes are the breakfast for two for Valentine's Day, or just when you have some starter to use up.
This go-to pancake recipe is totally vegan (dairy-free and egg-free) and makes perfectly fluffy pancakes your family will love.
These delicious waffles make a hearty breakfast option for those with gluten, dairy, and/or egg allergies.
These mini egg omelets with green onions, spinach, and mushrooms are baked in muffin tins to create an easy, on-the-go breakfast.
Instant coffee and maple syrup are the perfect marriage in this creamy maple iced coffee that's chilled overnight to create the ultimate caffeinated, fall-friendly punch.
Puffball mushrooms have a fluffy texture and an earthy flavor that goes well with eggs or in soup or quiche.
Crispy fried chicken tenders and bacon served on a gluten-free waffle topped with a creamy, spicy maple sauce will convince you to put your diet on hold for a day.
You won't believe how easy it is to make this ham and cheese cauliflower waffle, a low-carb version of the brunch favorite.
Give your overnight oats a makeover for fall using a caramel-flavored protein drink and a blend of cinnamon, ginger, and pumpkin pie spice.
This is a simple winter quiche made with puff pastry, sauteed cabbage, egg, and Swiss cheese, perfect for the weekend.
This is a savory, dinner-worthy puff pastry recipe with tuna, creme fraiche, mayonnaise, Swiss cheese, and tomatoes.
Treat your brunch crowd to a taste of the tropics with this easy-to-make twist on the classic mimosa starring apricot mango juice.
This hearty breakfast casserole recipe incorporates sweet potatoes, sausage, Cheddar cheese, tomatoes, and eggs.
This sweet potato sausage casserole is a great breakfast dish to make on Sunday night to have for the coming work week.
This can be mixed and matched up with any veggies, meats, or cheeses in your refrigerator; this recipe just happens to use sweet potatoes, sausage, and Cheddar cheese.
Enjoy your breakfast in cookie form with this recipe featuring coconut, chocolate chips, and maple nut granola.
These creamy, cheesy hash brown potatoes made in a slow cooker are great for potlucks and game day parties.
Enjoy pancakes in the morning without the added sugar or dairy when you sweeten them with bananas and use dairy-free cashew milk.
A spicy and savory medley of some breakfast food favorites is baked into a bread pudding casserole perfect for serving a crowd. This filling dish even tastes great leftover.
These oatmeal cookies are a great breakfast option when you need a quick grab-and-go meal--they're also perfect for a quick treat after lunch or dinner.
This is great as a midday treat or after dinner for dessert. No need to feel guilty because it's fat free and low in calories.
Kids will love these grab-and-go mini frittatas that taste like pizza thanks to a combination of sausage, tomato sauce, and cheese.
Steel-cut oats are combined and cooked with coconut cream, coconut flakes, almonds, and pears in a slow cooker for one creamy, delicious breakfast.
Steel-cut oats, milk, apple, and sugary spices are thrown together and made ahead in a slow cooker for a delicious and easy breakfast.
Steel-cut oats, maple syrup, banana, and nuts are combined and baked for on-the-go breakfast bars that will make your mornings easier and delicious.
Steel-cut oats are cooked on the stovetop and blended with raisins, walnuts, and spices before they're refrigerated overnight for a hearty and delicious breakfast.
These delicious egg boats with Cheddar cheese and bacon are easy to prepare and are a good way to use up leftover baguettes.
In this quick and easy breakfast recipe eggs are cracked on top of a creamy and flavorful sharp Cheddar cheese mixture and baked to delicious perfection
Eggs are baked with bacon and creamy milk to fluffy deliciousness and served with buttered toast for a lazy brunch or special breakfast.
This casserole with sausage, English muffins, bell peppers, and Cheddar cheese is easy to make for breakfast or brunch!
This bowl combines all of your breakfast favorites such as sausage, eggs, gravy, and hash browns into one easy dish that provides a great start to your day.
Sausage, hash browns, Cheddar cheese, and seasoned scrambled eggs are cooked low and slow in a slow cooker for a breakfast casserole that the whole family with enjoy.
Make breakfast fun and delicious with these easy baked potato boats filled with bacon, Cheddar cheese, and eggs.
This recipe is amazing for all the right reasons: so nutritious, so quick and easy, so delicious! 

Feel free to experiment with different frozen fruit varieties or juices.
Toasted nuts and coconut combine with dates in this warming, easy to prepare millet porridge that is vegan and gluten-free.
Here's a twist on your usual Bloody Mary. This recipe makes 4 drinks to share with your brunch buddies. Prepare them the night before serving for optimum flavor.
The addition of sour cream makes these silver dollar pancakes extra fluffy and tender with no extra effort required.
These quick and easy silver dollar pancakes skip the dairy and extra calories, opting for rich soy milk and no added sugar.
Next time you run out of chocolate chips, use this recipe to create deliciously chocolaty mini pancakes.
Once you master the simple measurements for this easy, moist vegan banana-nut bread recipe, you won't need to find any other.
These quick and easy, low-carb, keto-friendly, breakfast muffins feature only 4 ingredients--eggs, salsa, bacon, and almond flour.
Packed with zesty Italian flavors, this easy sausage breakfast bake makes brunch time fun for the whole family.
Inspired by a Monte Cristo sandwich, this breakfast casserole features eggs, meat, cheese, and a raspberry topping.
These low-carb, almond flour-based pancakes have a hint of cinnamon and are super fluffy due to the beaten egg whites--an easy, delicious, breakfast recipe without the guilt.
Eggs are scrambled with kale, harissa, bell peppers, and bacon for a quick yet flavor-packed keto breakfast done in one pan.
Homemade harissa paste lends deep flavors to this tomato-based Moroccan stew with spiced kofte (meatballs), sausage, and cilantro.
This ham and egg breakfast casserole is a crowd-pleasing, make-ahead breakfast perfect for Memorial Day weekend or anytime you have guests.
This nutritious smoothie is essentially a liquid cheesecake breakfast with strawberries - great for breakfast on the go with over 18 grams of protein.
These chocolate pancakes topped with chocolate syrup, whipped cream, mini marshmallows, and graham crackers will remind you of s'mores.
This delicious pancake recipe full of banana and coconut flavors makes an excellent breakfast and is very easy to make!
These blender pancakes made with whole wheat kernels and agave are a nutritious option for a last-minute kid-friendly breakfast.
Banana extract, white chocolate chips, and coconut flakes add Caribbean flair to a pantry staple: pancake mix!
This delicious, rich, dessert-like mini chocolate pancake recipe can be topped with syrup, whipped topping, or both.
Blender pancakes are a quick and easy choice for breakfast, and this recipe with whole wheat flour and blueberries may become a weekend staple in your house.
Expecting guests for brunch? Prepare the tomatoes, bell peppers, and baguette the night before and wow your friends with these Basque poached eggs,
This delicious and moist banana bread is low in fat, high in vitamins, high in fiber, and makes a great replacement for traditional loaves.
This skinny breakfast casserole is hearty enough for a weekend brunch; the best part is, you can make it the night before and just bake it in the morning.
This chia porridge is delicious and makes use of whole grains, fruits, and seeds, so it will keep you full for hours.
These cookies combine oats, almonds, and chocolate with honey to create a healthy breakfast alternative that's easy to make and perfect to take with you on the go.
Peanut butter, banana, and oat cookies are made dairy-free with soy milk for a treat that is perfect for an on-the-go breakfast.
Old-fashioned buttermilk pancakes get updated with healthier ingredients such as teff flour, oat flour, and protein powder.
Chase away the winter blues with this smoothie made from a blend of spinach, apple, orange, cucumber, cranberries, and fresh ginger.
Ginger and cabbage are blended with apples, grapes, and carrot for a sweet and spicy smoothie to start your day.
You would never guess these light and fluffy cottage cheese pancakes have pureed cauliflower and whole wheat flour in the batter.
Scrambled eggs, chunks of sausage, chopped bacon, and briny capers make a delicious gourmet breakfast bruschetta.
Make your own addictive granola using oats, puffed rice, coconut, nuts, and dried fruit. Rosewater is the secret ingredient!
Spinach, kale, and parsley are blended with pineapple juice creating a very green drink for a morning pick-me-up or post-workout drink.
This chili quiche is simply chili topped with pepperjack, mozzarella, and Cheddar cheeses, then covered and baked with eggs. A hearty way to start your day!
Brickle bread is a sweet, breakfast-type bread loaded with pecans and poppy seeds and a hint of coconut perfect for breakfast or all day snacking.
This pina colada green smoothie is loaded with pineapple, coconut, dandelion greens, and cashews delivering a taste of the tropics.
A simple recipe for a breakfast casserole needs just a few ingredients, including eggs, ground sausage, cheese, and milk. Make it the night before and enjoy it while watching the kids unwrap presents or hunt for their Easter baskets.
Use pink sparkling wine and a hint of peach schnapps for a different twist for mimosas perfect for brunches or Easter.
It doesn't get any easier than scrambling some eggs and adding canned chili. Perfect for breakfasts while camping.
Granny Smith apples, kale, and romaine lettuce are blended together into a clean green juice that will help start your day off right!
Apple cinnamon bread is made extra hearty thanks to cocoa powder, walnuts, and oats added to this quick bread batter.
This pumpkin apple smoothie made with almond milk, chia seeds, and hemp seeds is a hearty, on-the-go breakfast.
Bacon, eggs and potatoes all-in-one in this delicious stuffed potato! Enjoy for breakfast or lunch with a fruit or green salad.
Gluten-free raisin bread bars, made with gluten-free baking mix, date sugar, and raisins, are a sweet treat for all your gluten-free family members and friends.
Serve this delicious, protein-packed egg and egg-white scramble with spinach and avocado alongside a slice of whole wheat toast.
Mango and currants are blended together as a flavorful duo which leads to the clever name of Currant Affairs Smoothie.
These pancakes are made with garbanzo bean flour, oat bran, orange juice, chopped apple, and rolled oats.
Whole-grain pancakes loaded with whole wheat flour, oats, amaranth, chia seeds, and flax seeds are a hearty way to start the day.
Zucchini bread is made a little healthier with whole wheat flour, wheat bran, and applesauce used in the batter.
Sour cream gives this banana bread a little extra tang to cut the sweetness; bake in 4 mini loaf pans for quick, on-the-go breakfast.
Diced veggie breakfast patties, potatoes, peppers and mushrooms make an energy-packed breakfast egg scramble.
Here's a quick breakfast scramble with a ranchero twist. Serve with whole wheat toast.
This unique smoothie recipe blends Brazil nuts, banana, and kefir for a tasty morning wake-up call. Add puffed amaranth and cocoa powder for variety.
Kale, spinach, celery, ginger, and apple are blended together with cinnamon and fresh ginger creating an energizing green smoothie.
This sweet French toast made with challah and brown sugar gets a lift with the addition of pineapple sage leaves.
This purple moose smoothie is a tasty combination of blueberries, peanut butter, and banana that will keep you full all morning.
Peanut butter bread made with coconut flour is a grain-free and gluten-free treat. Try a slice with fruit spread!
Use a powerful blender to grind oats and wheat berries to get these cinnamon-accented pancakes filled with cottage cheese.
Chia seed pancakes with a hint of orange will become a family-favorite in your household; top with your favorite fixings.
A tart blackberry compote is spooned over whole-grain French toast that's cooked with warm fall spices for the perfect guilt-free breakfast.
Great as a snack or breakfast, this homemade oat granola combines coconut flakes, almonds, brown rice syrup, and more gluten-free goodness.
Matzo brei - matzo scrambled into eggs and a delicious mixture of seasonings - is a quick, easy, and 100% kosher dish perfect for Passover.
Eggs are scrambled with matzo pieces and cream in this recipe for matza brei, a quick and easy breakfast or brunch any time of the year.
Zwiebelplootz is a savory traditional onion tart from Franconia, Germany, where it is usually eaten in the fall with fresh white wine.
Crunchy slices of Italian bread are topped with eggs baked with tomatoes, basil, and Parmesan cheese to make these clever morning bruschetta.
This Chinese comfort-style rice dish with chicken, bok choy, and fresh water chestnuts can be eaten at any meal.
A recipe for traditional Low Country shrimp and grits gets some gourmet touches from freshly toasted pine nuts and Asian red curry paste.
Dosas are a common South Indian crepe made of rice, a type of bean, and fenugreek. This plain dosa recipe is great for a snack or breakfast.
These Passover pancakes are light, fluffy, and cheesy and perfect served with honey, jam, or fresh fruit; try this recipe any time of year.
Ejja is a spicy, rustic mixture of tomatoes, peppers, harissa, garlic, and eggs that's popular for breakfast or brunch in Tunisia.