In a small, bowl, combine the sage, salt, ground black pepper, marjoram, brown sugar, crushed red pepper and cloves. Mix well. Place the pork in a large bowl and add the mixed spices to it. Mix well with your hands and form into patties. Saute the patties in a large skillet over medium high heat for 5 minutes per side, or until internal pork temperature reaches 160 degrees F (73 degrees C).
Combine water, oats, apple, cinnamon, salt, and nutmeg in a multi-functional pressure cooker (such as Instant Pot(R)). Close and lock the lid. Seal vent. Select Manual function; set timer for 5 minutes. Allow 10 to 15 minutes for pressure to build. Release pressure using the natural-release method according to manufacturer's instructions, about 10 minutes. Release remaining pressure naturally. Stir and remove pot carefully with oven mitts.
Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add the ground beef, and cook, stirring to crumble, until no longer pink, about 8 minutes. Pour off any excess grease, then stir in the garlic, onions, and mushrooms. Reduce heat to medium, cover, and cook until the onion has softened and turned translucent, about 5 minutes. Stir in the nutmeg, oregano, spinach, salt, and pepper and cook until the spinach is heated through. Reduce heat to medium-low, and make 6 egg-sized indentations into the beef and spinach mixture. Crack the eggs into the each indentation, then cover, and continue cooking until the eggs are done to your liking, about 5 minutes more for medium.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking pan. Place half of the bread cubes on bottom of baking pan. Sprinkle with half of the ham and then half of the cheese; repeat. In a large bowl, beat together eggs, milk, salt, hot sauce and green onions. Pour egg mixture into pan. Place pan on top of a baking sheet with a rim and place in oven. Pour water into baking sheet and bake for 60 minutes, or until eggs have set.
Stir the water, milk, and quinoa together in a saucepan; bring to a gentle boil. Reduce heat to low and simmer 5 minutes, or until the quinoa begins to soften. Stir in the banana, rolled oats, oat bran, salt, and cinnamon. Cook, stirring frequently over low heat for 2 to 5 minutes or until the mixture thickens. Remove from the heat and stir in the walnuts, brown sugar, and vanilla.
Place coconut milk, squash, maple syrup, cinnamon, rosemary, ginger, nutmeg, and salt, in that order, in a multi-functional pressure cooker (such as Instant Pot(R)). Close and lock the lid. Select high pressure according to manufacturer's instructions; set timer for 6 minutes. Allow 10 to 15 minutes for pressure to build. Release pressure carefully using the quick-release method according to manufacturer's instructions, about 5 minutes. Unlock and remove the lid. Use an immersion blender or hand mixer to blend mixture. Divide among bowls and top with pistachios, cranberry sauce, and orange zest.
Place bananas, blueberries and  juice in a blender, puree.  Use honey and/or vanilla to taste. Use more or less liquid depending on the thickness you want for your smoothie.
Combine turkey, apple, maple syrup, salt, sage, garlic powder, black pepper, marjoram, cinnamon, and cloves in a bowl; mix well. Form into 10 small patties. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Fry patties until no longer pink in the center and the juices run clear, 3 to 4 minutes per side. An instant-read thermometer inserted into the center should read at least 165 degrees F (74 degrees C).
Combine milk with vinegar in a medium bowl and set aside for 5 minutes to "sour". Combine flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a large mixing bowl. Whisk egg and butter into "soured" milk. Pour the flour mixture into the wet ingredients and whisk until lumps are gone. Heat a large skillet over medium heat, and coat with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 cupfuls of batter onto the skillet, and cook until bubbles appear on the surface. Flip with a spatula, and cook until browned on the other side.
In a large bowl, sift together the flour, baking powder, salt and sugar. Make a well in the center and pour in the milk, egg and melted butter; mix until smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour three 7x3 inch loaf pans. In a large bowl, mix together pumpkin puree, eggs, oil, water and sugar until well blended. In a separate bowl, whisk together the flour, baking soda, salt, cinnamon, nutmeg, cloves and ginger. Stir the dry ingredients into the pumpkin mixture until just blended. Pour into the prepared pans. Bake for about 50 minutes in the preheated oven. Loaves are done when toothpick inserted in center comes out clean.
Grease and flour two 8 x 4 inch pans.  Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Sift flour, salt, baking powder, soda, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Beat eggs, oil, vanilla, and sugar together in a large bowl.  Add sifted ingredients to the creamed mixture, and beat well.  Stir in zucchini and nuts until well combined.  Pour batter into prepared pans. Bake for 40 to 60 minutes, or until tester inserted in the center comes out clean.  Cool in pan on rack for 20 minutes.  Remove bread from pan, and completely cool.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Grease four 7x3 inch loaf pans. In a small bowl, stir together 1/4 cup white sugar and 1 teaspoon cinnamon. Dust pans lightly with cinnamon and sugar mixture. In a large bowl, cream butter and 3 cups sugar. Mix in eggs, mashed bananas, sour cream, vanilla and cinnamon. Mix in salt, baking soda and flour. Stir in nuts.  Divide into prepared pans. Bake for 1 hour, until a toothpick inserted in center comes out clean.
Measure flour into a large mixing bowl. Slowly whisk in the milk. Whisk in the salt, eggs, cinnamon, vanilla extract and sugar until smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium heat. Soak bread slices in mixture until saturated. Cook bread on each side until golden brown. Serve hot.
Preheat waffle iron. Beat eggs in large bowl with hand beater until fluffy.  Beat in flour, milk, vegetable oil, sugar, baking powder, salt and vanilla,  just until smooth. Spray preheated waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray. Pour mix onto hot waffle iron. Cook until golden brown. Serve hot.
In a large bowl, combine flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt. In a separate bowl, beat together buttermilk, milk, eggs and melted butter. Keep the two mixtures separate until you are ready to cook. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. You can flick water across the surface and if it beads up and sizzles, it's ready! Pour the wet mixture into the dry mixture, using a wooden spoon or fork to blend.  Stir until it's just blended together.  Do not over stir! Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/2 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
In a large mixing bowl, whisk together the flour and the eggs. Gradually add in the milk and water, stirring to combine. Add the salt and butter; beat until smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each crepe. Tilt the pan with a circular motion so that the batter coats the surface evenly. Cook the crepe for about 2 minutes, until the bottom is light brown. Loosen with a spatula, turn and cook the other side. Serve hot.
In a large bowl, mix together flour, salt, baking powder and sugar; set aside. Preheat waffle iron to desired temperature. In a separate bowl, beat the eggs. Stir in the milk, butter and vanilla. Pour the milk mixture into the flour mixture; beat until blended. Ladle the batter into a preheated waffle iron. Cook the waffles until golden and crisp. Serve immediately.
In a bowl, mix together the milk, pumpkin, egg, oil and vinegar. Combine the  flour, brown sugar, baking powder, baking soda, allspice, cinnamon, ginger and salt in a separate bowl. Stir into the pumpkin mixture just enough to combine. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9 inch pie pan. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add onions and cook, stirring occasionally, until onions are soft. Stir in spinach and continue cooking until excess moisture has evaporated. In a large bowl, combine eggs, cheese, salt and pepper. Add spinach mixture and stir to blend. Scoop into prepared pie pan. Bake in preheated oven until eggs have set, about 30 minutes. Let cool for 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. In a large bowl, mix hash browns, ham, cream of potato soup, sour cream, and Cheddar cheese. Spread evenly into prepared dish. Sprinkle with Parmesan cheese. Bake 1 hour in the preheated oven, or until bubbly and lightly brown. Serve immediately.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). In a medium skillet, melt butter over medium heat. Saute garlic and onion in butter until lightly browned, about 7 minutes. Stir in spinach, mushrooms, feta and 1/2  cup Cheddar cheese. Season with salt and pepper. Spoon mixture into pie crust. In a medium bowl, whisk together eggs and milk. Season with salt and pepper. Pour into the pastry shell, allowing egg mixture to thoroughly combine with spinach mixture. Bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes. Sprinkle top with remaining Cheddar cheese, and bake an additional 35 to 40 minutes, until set in center. Allow to stand 10 minutes before serving.
Combine flour, white sugar, baking powder and salt. In a separate bowl, mix together egg, milk, vegetable oil and bananas. Stir flour mixture into banana mixture; batter will be slightly lumpy. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Cook until pancakes are golden brown on both sides; serve hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease one 9 or 10 inch tube/Bundt(R) pan. Mix white sugar and cinnamon in a plastic bag. Cut biscuits into quarters. Shake 6 to 8 biscuit pieces in the sugar cinnamon mix. Arrange pieces in the bottom of the prepared pan. Continue until all biscuits are coated and placed in pan. If using nuts and raisins, arrange them in and among the biscuit pieces as you go along. In a small saucepan, melt the margarine with the brown sugar over medium heat. Boil for 1 minute. Pour over the biscuits. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 35 minutes. Let bread cool in pan for 10 minutes, then turn out onto a plate. Do not cut! The bread just pulls apart.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour three 9x5 inch loaf pans. In a large bowl, mix together the pumpkin, oil, sugar, and eggs. Combine the flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves; stir into the pumpkin mixture until well blended. Divide the batter evenly between the prepared pans. Bake in preheated oven for 45 minutes to 1 hour. The top of the loaf should spring back when lightly pressed.
Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Arrange half the bread cubes in the dish, and top with cream cheese cubes. Sprinkle 1 cup blueberries over the cream cheese, and top with remaining bread cubes. In a large bowl, mix the eggs, milk, vanilla extract, and syrup. Pour over the bread cubes. Cover, and refrigerate overnight. Remove the bread cube mixture from the refrigerator about 30 minutes before baking. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Cover, and bake 30 minutes. Uncover, and continue baking 25 to 30 minutes, until center is firm and surface is lightly browned. In a medium saucepan, mix the sugar, cornstarch, and water. Bring to a boil. Stirring constantly, cook 3 to 4 minutes. Mix in the remaining 1 cup blueberries. Reduce heat, and simmer 10 minutes, until the blueberries burst. Stir in the butter, and pour over the baked French toast
Crumble sausage into a medium skillet. Cook over medium heat until evenly brown; drain. In a medium bowl, mix together mustard powder, salt, eggs and milk. Add the sausage, bread cubes, and cheese, and stir to coat evenly.  Pour into a greased 9x13 inch baking dish. Cover, and chill in the refrigerator for 8 hours, or overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Cover, and bake 45 to 60 minutes. Uncover, and reduce temperature to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Bake for an additional 30 minutes, or until set.
Butter a 9x13 inch baking dish. Arrange the slices of bread in the bottom. In a large bowl, beat together eggs, milk, cream, vanilla and cinnamon. Pour over bread slices, cover, and refrigerate overnight. The next morning, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a small saucepan, combine butter, brown sugar and corn syrup; heat until bubbling. Pour over bread and egg mixture. Bake in preheated oven, uncovered, for 40 minutes.
Beat together egg, milk, salt, desired spices and vanilla. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or skillet over medium-high heat. Dunk each slice of bread in egg mixture, soaking both sides.  Place in pan, and cook on both sides until golden.  Serve hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly butter an 8x8 inch baking pan. Line bottom of pan with bread cubes. In a large bowl, beat together eggs, milk, 2 tablespoons sugar, salt and vanilla. pour egg mixture over bread. Dot with margarine; let stand for 10 minutes. Combine remaining 2 tablespoons sugar with 1 teaspoon cinnamon and sprinkle over the top.  Bake in preheated oven about 45 to 50 minutes, until top is golden.
Grease and flour two 7x3 inch loaf pans.  Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In one bowl, whisk together flour, soda, salt, and sugar.  Mix in slightly beaten eggs, melted butter, and mashed bananas.  Stir in nuts if desired.  Pour into prepared pans. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 1 hour, or until a wooden toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean.
Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9 inch pie pan. Line bottom of pie plate with cheese and crumbled bacon. Combine eggs, butter, onion, salt, flour and milk; whisk together until smooth; pour into pie pan. Bake in preheated oven for 35 minutes, until set. Serve hot or cold.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Over medium-low heat melt butter in a large saucepan. Add onions, garlic and broccoli. Cook slowly, stirring occasionally until the vegetables are soft. Spoon vegetables into crust and sprinkle with cheese. Combine eggs and milk. Season with salt and pepper. Stir in melted butter. Pour egg mixture over vegetables and cheese. Bake in preheated oven for 30 to 50 minutes, or until center has set.
In a large bowl, mix flour, sugar, baking powder and salt. Make a well in the center, and pour in milk, egg and oil. Mix until smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
In a large bowl, sift together flour, salt, baking powder and sugar. In a small bowl, beat together egg and milk. Stir milk and egg into flour mixture. Mix in the butter and fold in the blueberries. Set aside for 1 hour. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Preheat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Combine flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda and salt. Make a well in the center. In a separate bowl, beat together egg, milk and oil. Pour milk mixture into flour mixture. Beat until smooth. Pour or scoop the batter onto the hot griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble, and set aside. Cook spinach according to package instructions. Allow to cool, then squeeze dry. Heat olive oil in skillet over medium heat. Saute onions until soft and translucent. Stir in mushrooms, and cook for 2 minutes, or until soft. Stir in ham and cooked bacon. Remove from heat. In a large bowl, combine spinach, sour cream, salt and pepper. Divide, and spread into pie crusts. Layer with bacon mixture. Mix together Monterey Jack, Cheddar and Parmesan, and sprinkle over pies. Whisk together eggs, half-and-half and parsley. Season with salt and pepper, and pour over pies. Place pies on baking sheet, and bake on middle shelf  in preheated oven for 40 minutes. The top will be puffed and golden brown. Remove from oven, and let stand for 5 to 10 minutes.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a 9x5 inch loaf pan. Combine flour, baking powder, sugar, salt and baking soda. Blend egg and buttermilk together, and add all at once to the flour mixture. Mix just until moistened. Stir in butter. Pour into prepared pan. Bake for 65 to 70 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted in the bread comes out clean. Cool on a wire rack. Wrap in foil for several hours, or overnight, for best flavor.
Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Line two large baking sheets with parchment or aluminum foil. Combine the oats, wheat germ, oat bran, sunflower seeds, almonds, pecans, and walnuts in a large bowl.  Stir together the salt, brown sugar, maple syrup, honey, oil, cinnamon, and vanilla in a saucepan. Bring to a boil over medium heat, then pour over the dry ingredients, and stir to coat. Spread the mixture out evenly on the baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven until crispy and toasted, about 20 minutes. Stir once halfway through. Cool, then stir in the raisins or cranberries before storing in an airtight container.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour one 9x13 inch pan, or two 7x3 inch loaf pans. Combine banana and sour cream. Set aside. In a large bowl, cream together the margarine and sugar until smooth. Beat in the eggs one at a time, then stir in the vanilla and banana mixture. Combine the flour, baking soda, baking powder and salt; stir into the banana mixture. Spread the batter evenly into the prepared pan or pans. Bake for 50 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a toothpick inserted into the center of the bread comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F ( 165 degrees C). Grease and flour two 8x4 inch loaf pans. In a large bowl, beat eggs until light and frothy. Mix in oil and sugar. Stir in zucchini and vanilla. Combine flour, cinnamon, soda, baking powder, salt and nuts; stir into the egg mixture. Divide batter into prepared pans. Bake for 60 to 70 minutes, or until done.
In a blender, combine soy milk, oats, banana and strawberries. Add vanilla and sugar if desired. Blend until smooth. Pour into glasses and serve.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch square baking dish. Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble, and set aside. In the prepared baking dish, stir together the shredded potatoes and butter. Line the bottom and sides of the baking dish with the mixture. In a bowl, mix the sausage, Cheddar cheese, onion, cottage cheese, and eggs. Pour over the potato mixture. Bake 1 hour in the preheated oven, or until a toothpick inserted into center of the casserole comes out clean. Let cool for 5 minutes before serving.
Sift together flour, baking soda, baking powder, and salt. In a large bowl, cream sugar and butter or margarine.  Beat the egg slightly, and mix into the creamed mixture with the bananas.  Mix in sifted ingredients until just combined. Stir in milk and nuts.  Spread batter into one greased and floured 9x5 inch loaf pan. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) until top is brown and cracks along the top.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Butter and flour two 9 x 5-inch loaf pans. Slice strawberries and place in medium-sized bowl. Sprinkle lightly with sugar, and set aside while preparing batter. Combine flour, sugar, cinnamon, salt and baking soda in large bowl; mix well. Blend oil and eggs into strawberries. Add strawberry mixture to flour mixture, blending until dry ingredients are just moistened. Stir in pecans. Divide batter into pans. Bake in preheated oven until a tester inserted in the center comes out clean, 45 to 50 minutes (test each loaf separately). Let cool in pans on wire rack for 10 minutes. Turn loaves out of pans, and allow to cool before slicing.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a large bowl, combine sausage, biscuit baking mix and cheese. Form into walnut size balls and place on baking sheets. Bake in preheated oven for 20 to 25 minutes, until golden brown and sausage is cooked through.
In a blender combine eggs, milk, flour, salt and oil.  Process until smooth.  Cover and refrigerate 1 hour.
                                    Watch Now Heat a skillet over medium-high heat and brush with oil.  Pour 1/4 cup of crepe batter into pan, tilting to completely coat the surface of the pan.  Cook 2 to 5 minutes, turning once, until golden.  Repeat with remaining batter.
                                    Watch Now
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour two 8x4-inch loaf pans. Cream the margarine and cream cheese together. Gradually add the white sugar, and continue beating until light and fluffy. Add eggs one at a time, beating well after each addition. Stir in the mashed bananas and vanilla. Add flour, baking powder, and baking soda; mix until batter is just moist. In a small bowl, mix together chopped pecans, 2 tablespoons brown sugar, and cinnamon. Divide half the batter between the two prepared loaf pans. Sprinkle pecan mixture over the batter in the pans, and top with remaining batter. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of each loaf comes out clean, about 45 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease one 9x5 inch loaf pan. Measure flour, 1 cup sugar, baking powder, baking soda, 1 1/2 teaspoons cinnamon, salt, buttermilk, oil, eggs and vanilla into large mixing bowl. Beat 3 minutes. Pour into prepared loaf pan. Smooth top. Combine 2 tablespoons white sugar, 1 teaspoon cinnamon and butter, mixing until crumbly. Sprinkle topping over smoothed batter. Using knife, cut in a light swirling motion to give a marbled effect. Bake for about 50 minutes. Test with toothpick. When inserted it should come out clean. Remove bread from pan to rack to cool.
In a blender combine strawberries, milk, yogurt, sugar and vanilla. Toss in the ice. Blend until smooth and creamy. Pour into glasses and serve.
In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, butter and buttermilk. Combine the flour, baking powder, baking soda and sugar; stir into the wet ingredients just until blended. Adjust the thickness of the batter to your liking by adding more flour or buttermilk if necessary. Heat a large skillet over medium heat, and coat with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 cupfuls of batter onto the skillet, and cook until bubbles appear on the surface. Flip with a spatula, and cook until browned on the other side. Continue with remaining batter.
In large bowl, whisk together eggs, milk, melted butter, flour sugar and salt until smooth. Heat a medium-sized skillet or crepe pan over medium heat. Grease pan with a small amount of butter or oil applied with a brush or paper towel.  Using a serving spoon or small ladle, spoon about 3 tablespoons crepe batter into hot pan, tilting the pan so that bottom surface is evenly coated.  Cook over medium heat, 1 to 2 minutes on a side, or until golden brown.  Serve immediately.
Melt butter in a small saucepan over medium heat. Mix in brown sugar and corn syrup, stirring until sugar is dissolved. Pour into a 9x13 inch baking dish. Remove crusts from bread, and arrange in the baking dish in a single layer. In a small bowl, whisk together eggs, half and half, vanilla extract, orange brandy, and salt. Pour over the bread. Cover, and chill at least 8 hours, or overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove the dish from the refrigerator, and bring to room temperature. Bake uncovered 35 to 40 minutes in the preheated oven, until puffed and lightly browned.
Preheat and lightly grease a large skillet or electric griddle. Mix the flour, salt, and baking soda together in a bowl. Add the egg, buttermilk, and butter; stir together lightly, but keep it lumpy. The batter should look thick, spongy, and puffy. Drop 1/3 cup of the batter onto the cooking surface, spreading lightly with the bottom of the cup. Cook until lightly-browned on each side, 1 to 2 minutes per side.
Place flour, oats, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, salt, buttermilk, vanilla, oil and egg in a food processor and puree until smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place muffin cups in muffin tin, or grease with a little butter. Mix sugar, oil, and egg until creamy and light yellow in a bowl. Add bananas and walnuts. Add flour, baking soda, and salt. Stir until completely smooth. Spoon the batter into the muffin tin. Bake for 30 to 40 minutes, until toothpick poked in center muffin comes out clean.
Sift together flour, baking powder, salt, and sugar in a large bowl. Whisk in melted butter, egg, and milk until combined. Let batter rest for 5 minutes. Preheat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Spray with cooking spray. Pour batter into the hot skillet, about 1/4 cup of batter for each pancake. Cook for 2 to 3 minutes, until bubbles appear on the sides and center of each pancake. Flip and cook until golden, about 1 to 2 minutes.
Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble, and set aside. Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Line the bottom of the prepared baking dish with crescent roll dough, and sprinkle with crumbled sausage. In a large bowl, mix beaten eggs, mozzarella, and Cheddar. Season the mixture with oregano, and pour over the sausage and crescent rolls. Bake 25 to 30 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease a 10 inch quiche dish. In a large bowl, beat together milk, eggs, baking mix, butter and parmesan cheese. Batter will be lumpy. Stir in broccoli, ham and Cheddar cheese. Pour into prepared quiche dish. Bake in preheated oven for 50 minutes, until eggs are set and top is golden brown.
In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, oil, applesauce, and vanilla. Beat in whole wheat pastry flour, flax seed meal, wheat germ, all-purpose flour, baking powder, sugar, and salt until batter is smooth. Preheat a waffle iron, and coat with cooking spray. Pour batter into waffle iron in batches, and cook until crisp and golden brown.
In a large bowl, mix together the milk, egg yolks and vanilla. Stir in the flour, sugar, salt and melted butter until well blended. Heat a crepe pan over medium heat until hot. Coat with vegetable oil or cooking spray. Pour about 1/4 cup of batter into the pan and tip to spread the batter to the edges. When bubbles form on the top and the edges are dry, flip over and cook until lightly browned on the other side and edges are golden. Repeat with remaining batter. Fill crepes with your favorite fruit, cream, caramel or even ice cream or cheese to serve.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Combine bananas, sugar, egg, and butter together in a bowl. Mix flour and baking soda together in a separate bowl; stir into banana mixture until batter is just mixed. Stir salt into batter. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of the bread comes out clean, about 1 hour.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a large bowl, mix together oats, brown sugar, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt. Beat in milk, eggs, melted butter, and vanilla extract. Stir in dried cranberries. Spread into a 9x13 inch baking dish. Bake in preheated oven for 40 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil. Arrange bacon on baking sheet in a single layer with the edges touching or slightly overlapping. Bake in preheated oven to desired degree of doneness, 10 to 15 minutes. Remove bacon from the baking sheet with tongs or a fork, and drain on a paper towel-lined plate.
In a large bowl, beat together eggs, flour, baking powder, salt, and pepper. Mix in potatoes and onion. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat. In batches, drop heaping tablespoonfuls of the potato mixture into the skillet. Press to flatten. Cook about 3 minutes on each side, until browned and crisp. Drain on paper towels.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Lightly grease 8 muffin cups. In a large skillet or frying pan, cook ground chuck with onion and garlic powder until evenly brown; drain off the grease. Stir in the barbeque sauce and simmer for another 3 minutes. Roll out each biscuit on a floured surface so that each biscuit is 6 inches across. Put the biscuit in the muffin tin and fold up sides to  create a cup shape. Fill each biscuit fill almost to the top with the meat mixture; top with cheddar cheese. Bake in preheated oven until biscuits are baked, cheese is melted and tops are golden brown, about 15 minutes.
Bring water, grits, and salt to a boil in a heavy saucepan with a lid. Stir in half-and-half and simmer until grits are thickened and tender, 15 to 20 minutes. Set aside and keep warm. Sprinkle shrimp with salt and cayenne pepper; drizzle with lemon juice. Set aside in a bowl. Place andouille sausage slices in a large skillet over medium heat; fry sausage until browned, 5 to 8 minutes. Remove skillet from heat. Cook bacon in a large skillet over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Retain bacon drippings in skillet. Transfer bacon slices to paper towels, let cool, and crumble. Cook and stir green, red, and yellow bell peppers, onion, and garlic in the bacon drippings until the onion is translucent, about 8 minutes. Stir shrimp and cooked vegetables into the andouille sausage and mix to combine. Melt butter in a saucepan over medium heat; stir in flour to make a smooth paste. Turn heat to low and cook, stirring constantly, until the mixture is medium brown in color, 8 to 10 minutes. Watch carefully, mixture burns easily. Pour the butter-flour mixture into the skillet with andouille sausage, shrimp, and vegetables. Place the skillet over medium heat and pour in chicken broth, bacon and Worcestershire sauce, cooking and stirring until the sauce thickens and the shrimp become opaque and bright pink, about 8 minutes. Just before serving, mix sharp Cheddar cheese into grits until melted and grits are creamy and light yellow. Serve shrimp mixture over cheese grits.
Combine flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt in a bowl; make a 'well' in the center of the flour mixture. Pour milk, eggs, and 1 tablespoon oil into the well. Mix until well moistened. Place a griddle over medium-high heat; sprinkle a few drops of water onto the griddle. If the droplets bounce, the griddle is ready; add 2 teaspoons oil. Spoon batter onto the griddle; cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 3 to 5 more minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Warm the milk in a small saucepan until it bubbles, then remove from heat.  Let cool until lukewarm. Dissolve yeast in warm water, and set aside until yeast is frothy.  Mix in eggs, sugar, butter or margarine, salt, and raisins.  Stir in cooled milk.  Add the flour gradually to make a stiff dough. Knead dough on a lightly floured surface for a few minutes.  Place in a large, greased, mixing bowl, and turn to grease the surface of the dough.  Cover with a damp cloth.  Allow to rise until doubled. Roll out on a lightly floured surface into a large rectangle 1/2 inch thick.  Moisten dough with 2 tablespoons milk.  Mix together 3/4 cup sugar and 2 tablespoons cinnamon, and sprinkle mixture on top of the moistened dough.  Roll up tightly; the roll should be about 3 inches in diameter.  Cut into thirds, and tuck under ends.  Place loaves into well greased 9 x 5 inch pans.  Lightly grease tops of loaves.  Let rise again for 1 hour. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 45 minutes, or until loaves are lightly browned and sound hollow when knocked.  Remove loaves from pans, and brush with melted butter or margarine.  Let cool before slicing.
Sift the flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt into a large bowl.  Whisk the water and oil together in a small bowl.  Make a well in the center of the dry ingredients, and pour in the wet.  Stir just until blended; mixture will be lumpy. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan, preferably glass. Mix flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a bowl. Stir bananas, milk, and cinnamon in another bowl. Beat butter and sugar in a third bowl until light and fluffy. Add eggs to butter mixture, one at a time, beating well after each addition. Stir banana mixture into butter mixture. Stir in dry mixture until blended. Fold in chocolate chips until just combined. Pour batter into prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 70 minutes. Cool in the pan for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack before slicing.
Sift together flour and baking powder, set aside.  Beat together the egg, milk, salt and artificial sweetener in a bowl.  Stir in flour until just moistened, add blueberries, and stir to incorporate. Preheat a heavy-bottomed skillet over medium heat, and spray with cooking spray.  Pour approximately 1/4 cup of the batter into the pan for each pancake.  Cook until bubbly, about 1 1/2 minutes.  Turn, and continue cooking until golden brown.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Line a cookie sheet with foil. In a large bowl, whisk together mayonnaise and milk until smooth. Whisk in eggs. Layer spinach, cheese, and onion in pie shell, making several layers of each. Pour in egg mixture. Place quiche on prepared cookie sheet. Cover quiche with foil. Bake in preheated oven for 45 minutes. Remove cover, and bake 10 to 15 minutes, or until top is golden brown and filling is set.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Grease 2 - 9x5 inch loaf pans. In a medium bowl, mash bananas and stir in the eggs until well blended. Set aside. In large bowl, beat shortening and gradually add sugar.  Stir in vanilla and banana mixture. Whisk together flour, baking soda, and salt; blend into batter.  Add walnuts if desired.  Divide between the prepared pans. Bake for 1 hour 15 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a toothpick inserted into the center of the loaf comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, beat oil and honey together. Add eggs, and mix well. Stir in bananas and vanilla. Stir in flour and salt. Add baking soda to hot water, stir to mix, and then add to batter.  Blend in chopped nuts. Spread batter into prepared pan. Bake until a toothpick inserted in the center of the loaf comes out clean, 55 to 60 minutes. Cool on wire rack for 1/2 hour before slicing.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. In a bowl, mix together butter, Dijon mustard, Worcestershire sauce, poppy seeds, and dried onion. Separate the tops from bottoms of the rolls, and place the bottom pieces into the prepared baking dish. Layer about half the ham onto the rolls. Arrange the Swiss cheese over the ham, and top with remaining ham slices in a layer. Place the tops of the rolls onto the sandwiches. Pour the mustard mixture evenly over the rolls. Bake in the preheated oven until the rolls are lightly browned and the cheese has melted, about 20 minutes. Slice into individual rolls through the ham and cheese layers to serve.
Place bananas, milk, peanut butter, honey, and ice cubes in a blender; blend until smooth, about 30 seconds.
Grease and flour three 7 x 3 inch pans.   Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Measure flour, sugar, baking soda, salt, and spices into a large bowl.  Stir to blend.  Add pumpkin, water, vegetable oil, eggs, and nuts.  Beat until well combined.  Pour batter into prepared pans. Bake for approximately 1 hour.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). In a large, deep skillet over medium-high heat, combine sausage, onion and green pepper. Cook until sausage is evenly brown. Drain, crumble, and set aside. Separate the dough into 10 individual biscuits. Flatten each biscuit out, then line the bottom and sides of 10 muffin cups. Evenly distribute sausage mixture between the cups. Mix together the eggs and milk, and divide between the cups. Sprinkle tops with shredded cheese. Bake in preheated oven for 18 to 20 minutes, or until filling is set.
Place a 10 inch cast iron skillet inside oven and preheat oven to 475 degrees F (245 degrees C). In a medium bowl, beat eggs with a whisk until light. Add milk and stir. Gradually whisk in flour, nutmeg and salt. Remove skillet from oven and reduce oven heat to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Melt butter in hot skillet so that inside of skillet is completely coated with butter. Pour all the batter in the skillet and return skillet to oven. Bake until puffed and lightly browned, about 12 minutes.  Remove promptly and sprinkle with powdered sugar.
Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Melt butter in the microwave, or in a small pan on the stove over low heat. Spray a 9x12 inch baking dish with vegetable spray. Place croutons in the bottom of the dish, and drizzle with melted butter. Sprinkle with grated Cheddar cheese. Crack the eggs into a bowl, whisking to break up the yolks. Add milk, peppers, mustard, salt, and pepper, and beat until well-combined. Pour over the croutons and cheese, and sprinkle with crumbled bacon. Bake in the preheated oven for 40 minutes. Remove from oven and allow to stand 10 minutes before serving.
Bake biscuits according to package directions. Meanwhile, cook sausage in large skillet over medium heat 5-6 minutes or until thoroughly heated, stirring frequently.  Stir in flour. Gradually add milk; cook until mixture comes to a boil and thickens, stirring constantly. Reduce heat to medium-low; simmer 2 minutes, stirring constantly. Season to taste with salt and pepper. Split biscuits in half.  Place 2 halves on each of 8 plates; top with about 1/3 cup gravy.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Pour melted butter into a glass 9x13 inch baking dish. In a large bowl, whisk together eggs and salt until well blended. Gradually whisk in milk. Pour egg mixture into the baking dish. Bake uncovered for 10 minutes, then stir, and bake an additional 10 to 15 minutes, or until eggs are set. Serve immediately.
Sift together flour, sugar and salt; set aside. In a large bowl, beat eggs and milk together with an electric mixer. Beat in flour mixture until smooth; stir in melted butter. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 2 tablespoons for each crepe. Tip and rotate pan to spread batter as thinly as possible. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Coat a 9x4-inch loaf pan with cooking spray. Whisk flour, salt, baking powder, and baking soda together in a bowl. Beat butter and sugar with an electric mixer in a large bowl until smooth. Add mashed bananas and beat until combined. Beat eggs into the butter mixture one at a time, fully blending each egg before adding the next. Stir vanilla extract and milk into the mixture. Stir chopped walnuts, chocolate chips, and flour mixture into banana mixture until just incorporated. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan. Tap pan on the counter to release any air pockets. Bake in preheated oven for about 1 hour 10 minutes, or until an inserted toothpick comes out clean. Let the bread rest in the pan for 15-20 minutes; remove from pan, slice, and serve.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C).
                                    Watch Now In a medium bowl, mix the bacon, onions, and both cheeses. Place this mixture in the unthawed pie crust.
                                    Watch Now Mix the eggs and half and half in a bowl. Pour the egg mixture over the cheese mixture.
                                    Watch Now Bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes. Reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and bake for an additional 35 minutes, until top of quiche begins to turn brown.
                                    Watch Now
In a cup or small bowl, whisk together the eggs, mayonnaise and water using a fork. Melt margarine in a skillet over low heat. Pour in the eggs, and stir constantly as they cook. Remove the eggs to a plate when they are set, but still moist. Do not over cook. Never add salt or pepper until eggs are on plate, but these are also good without.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 2 quart baking dish. Place the hash brown potatoes in the bottom of the baking dish. Heat a skillet over medium heat and cook and stir the sausage and onion until the sausage is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink; drain. Meanwhile, whisk together the eggs, milk, onion powder, garlic powder, salt, and pepper, and pour over the potatoes. Layer with half the Cheddar cheese, the sausage mixture, and the remaining Cheddar cheese. Cover with aluminum foil. Bake in the preheated oven for 1 hour. Remove cover; return casserole to the oven and bake until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, about 10 minutes. Let stand for 5 minutes before serving.
Heat olive oil in a medium skillet over medium heat. Place potatoes in the skillet, cover, and cook about 10 minutes, until tender but firm. Mix in spinach, green onions, and garlic. Season with salt and pepper. Continue cooking 1 to 2 minutes, until spinach is wilted. In a medium bowl, beat together eggs and milk. Pour into the skillet over the vegetables. Sprinkle with Cheddar cheese. Reduce heat to low, cover, and cook 5 to 7 minutes, or until eggs are firm.
Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, and set aside. Melt butter in skillet, and cook and stir the green onions and mushrooms until tender. In a large bowl, mix the eggs, cottage cheese, Monterey Jack cheese, and chiles. Stir in the sausage, green onions, and mushrooms. Cover, and refrigerate overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. In a bowl, sift together the flour, baking powder, and salt. Blend in the melted butter. Stir the flour mixture into the egg mixture. Pour into the prepared baking dish. Bake 40 to 50 minutes in the preheated oven, or until lightly brown. Let stand 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a small bowl, mix together 1/3 cup sugar and 2 teaspoons cinnamon; set aside. In large bowl combine flour, baking powder, salt and remaining 1 cup sugar.  Combine egg, milk, and oil; add to flour mixture.  Stir until just moistened. Pour half of the batter into pan.  Sprinkle with half the reserved cinnamon/sugar mixture. Repeat with remaining batter and cinnamon/sugar mixture.  Draw a knife through batter to marble. Bake in preheated oven for 45 to 50 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted into center of the loaf comes out clean. Let cool in pan for 10 minutes before removing to a wire rack to cool completely. Wrap in foil and let sit overnight before slicing.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir bacon and onion until bacon is evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain. Transfer bacon and onion to a large bowl. Stir in potatoes, eggs, Cheddar cheese, cottage cheese, and Swiss cheese. Pour mixture into prepared baking dish. Bake in preheated oven until eggs are set and cheese is melted, 45 to 50 minutes. Let stand 10 minutes before cutting and serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a medium bowl, beat together eggs, mayonnaise, flour, and milk until thoroughly blended.  Stir in crab, cheese, and onion.  Spread into pie shell. Bake for 40 to 45 minutes, or until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease two 9x5 inch loaf pans. Sift together the flour, baking soda, baking powder, salt, and pumpkin pie spice. Set aside. In a large bowl, beat together sugar, oil, eggs, and pumpkin. Stir in flour mixture alternately with water. Divide batter evenly between the prepared pans. Bake in the preheated oven for 60 to 70 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean. For best flavor, store wrapped in plastic wrap at room temperature for a full day before serving.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease an 11x8 inch baking dish. Brown sausage in a large skillet; drain fat. Combine sausage with green onion and spread evenly across the bottom of the baking dish. Top with shredded cheese. Whisk together eggs, water, milk, and gravy mix; add mixture to baking dish. Arrange bread squares evenly on top. If desired, drizzle melted butter over bread, and sprinkle with paprika. Bake 40 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean. Set aside 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 7x11 inch casserole dish. Fry the bacon in a large, deep skillet over medium-high heat until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain on a paper towel-lined plate. Crumble. In a large bowl beat together eggs and milk. Mix in cheese, bacon, onion and green pepper. Stir in the thawed hash browns. Pour mixture into prepared casserole. Cover with aluminum foil and bake in preheated oven for 45 minutes. Uncover and bake for another 30 minutes until eggs have set.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a 10-inch round baking dish. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion and bell pepper until softened, about 5 minutes. Stir in ham and continue cooking until heated through, 5 minutes more. Beat eggs and milk in a large bowl. Stir in Cheddar cheese and ham mixture; season with salt and black pepper. Pour mixture into prepared baking dish. Bake in preheated oven until eggs are browned and puffy, about 25 minutes. Serve warm.
Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, and set aside. Layer bread cubes, sausage, and Cheddar cheese in a lightly greased  7x11 inch baking dish. In a bowl, beat together the eggs, milk, salt, and mustard. Pour the egg mixture over the bread cube mixture. Cover, and refrigerate at least 8 hours or overnight. Remove the casserole from the refrigerator 30 minutes before baking. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake 50 to 60 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean. Let stand 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9 inch pie or quiche pan. Place spinach in a small saucepan. Cook over medium heat, stirring occasionally until soft. Drain off any remaining liquid. Stir in green onions, eggs, cottage cheese and Cheddar cheese. Pour mixture into prepared pan. Bake uncovered in preheated oven for 45 minutes. Remove from oven and sprinkle with crushed croutons. Return to oven and bake for an additional 15 minutes, until eggs are set.
In a large mixing bowl, beat the eggs. Add the milk, brown sugar and nutmeg; stir well to combine. Soak bread slices in the egg mixture until saturated. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Brown slices on both sides, sprinkle with cinnamon and serve hot.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Place bacon in a large skillet, and fry over medium-high heat until crisp. Drain on paper towels, then chop coarsely. Sprinkle bacon, cheese and onion into pastry shell. In a medium bowl, whisk together eggs, cream, salt, sugar and cayenne pepper. Pour mixture into pastry shell. Bake 15 minutes in the preheated oven. Reduce heat to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C), and bake an additional 30 minutes, or until a knife inserted 1 inch from edge comes out clean. Allow quiche to sit 10 minutes before cutting into wedges.
Place sausage in a skillet over medium-high heat, and cook until evenly brown. Drain, and set aside. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. In a large bowl, beat together the eggs, condensed cream of mushroom soup, and milk. Stir in the sausage and mushrooms, and pour into the prepared baking dish. Mix in the frozen potato rounds. Bake in preheated oven for 45 to 50 minutes. Sprinkle with cheese, and bake an additional 10 minutes, or until cheese is melted.
In a saucepan over medium heat, whisk together the egg, milk and brown sugar. Mix in the oats. When the oatmeal begins to boil, cook and stir until thick. Remove from the heat, and stir in butter until melted. Serve immediately.
In a medium bowl, mix eggs with oil and buttermilk. Stir in baking soda, wheat germ, salt and flour; mix until blended. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium-high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides, turning once.
To Make Hollandaise: Fill the bottom of a double boiler part-way with water. Make sure that water does not touch the top pan. Bring water to a gentle simmer. In the top of the double boiler, whisk together egg yolks, lemon juice, white pepper, Worcestershire sauce, and 1 tablespoon water. Add the melted butter to egg yolk mixture 1 or 2 tablespoons at a time while whisking yolks constantly. If hollandaise begins to get too thick, add a teaspoon or two of hot water. Continue whisking until all butter is incorporated. Whisk in salt, then remove from heat. Place a lid on pan to keep sauce warm. Preheat oven on broiler setting. To Poach Eggs: Fill a large saucepan with 3 inches of water. Bring water to a gentle simmer, then add vinegar. Carefully break eggs into simmering water, and allow to cook for 2 1/2 to 3 minutes. Yolks should still be soft in center. Remove eggs from water with a slotted spoon and set on a warm plate While eggs are poaching, brown the bacon in a medium skillet over medium-high heat and toast the English muffins on a baking sheet under the broiler. Spread toasted muffins with softened butter, and top each one with a slice of bacon, followed by one poached egg. Place 2 muffins on each plate and drizzle with hollandaise sauce. Sprinkle with chopped chives and serve immediately.
Beat eggs, oil, and milk together, and add to flour.  Stir until combined. Heat a greased griddle until drops of water sprinkled on it evaporate noisily.  Pour 1/8 to 1/4 cup batter onto the griddle.  Turn over with a metal spatula when bubbles begin to form on top.  Cook second side to a golden brown color.
In a large bowl, whisk together eggs, milk, cream and vanilla. Dip bread slices into egg mixture and place in a lightly greased 9x13 inch baking pan. Refrigerate overnight. The next morning: Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a small bowl, combine butter, sugar, maple syrup and pecans. Spoon mixture over bread. Bake in preheated oven until golden, about 40 minutes. Let stand 5 minutes before serving.
Preheat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. In a large bowl, mix whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour, brown sugar, baking powder, and salt. In a small bowl, mix oats and soy milk. Whisk in eggs and olive oil. Pour into the flour mixture all at once. Continue mixing until smooth. Gently fold in blueberries. Pour batter about 1/4 cup at a time onto the prepared griddle. Cook 1 to 2 minutes, until bubbly. Flip, and continue cooking until lightly browned.
Pour the rice and water into the bowl of a blender; blend until the rice just begins to break up, about 1 minute. Let rice and water stand at room temperature for a minimum of 3 hours. Strain the rice water into a pitcher and discard the rice. Stir the milk, vanilla, cinnamon, and sugar into the rice water. Chill and stir before serving over ice.
In a large bowl, blend eggs, flour, baking powder, sugar and salt.  Gradually mix in milk, stirring constantly. Add vanilla, melted butter and 1/2 teaspoon nutmeg.  Let batter stand for 30 minutes or overnight. Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Melt butter in a 10 inch oven proof skillet, brushing butter up on the sides of the pan. In a small bowl, combine 1/4 cup sugar, cinnamon and 1/2 teaspoon nutmeg. Sprinkle mixture over the butter. Line the pan with apple slices. Sprinkle remaining sugar over apples. Place pan over medium-high heat until the mixture bubbles, then gently pour the batter mixture over the apples. Bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes.  Reduce heat to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C) and bake for 10 minutes.  Slide pancake onto serving platter and cut into wedges.
Rinse potato cubes with cold water, and drain well. Melt butter or margarine in a large skillet over medium heat. Place potatoes in the skillet, and stir to coat with butter. Season with salt and pepper. Cover with a lid, and cook for 10 minutes. Remove the lid, and cook for another 10 minutes, turning frequently until brown and crisp on all sides..
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease an 8x4 inch loaf pan. In a bowl, mix the butter and sugar until smooth and creamy. Beat in the eggs. In a separate bowl, sift together the flour, baking soda, salt, cinnamon, and cloves. Mix into the butter mixture until moistened. Fold in the apples. Transfer to the prepared loaf pan. Bake 1 hour in the preheated oven, until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean. Cool in the pan for 15 minutes before removing to a wire rack to cool completely.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place asparagus in a steamer over 1 inch of boiling water, and cover. Cook until tender but still firm, about 2 to 6 minutes. Drain and cool. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Brush pie shells with beaten egg white. Sprinkle crumbled bacon and  chopped asparagus into pie shells. In a bowl, beat together eggs, cream, nutmeg, salt and pepper. Sprinkle Swiss cheese over bacon and asparagus. Pour egg mixture on top of cheese. Bake uncovered in preheated oven until firm, about 35 to 40 minutes. Let cool to room temperature before serving.
Preheat waffle iron. In a large mixing bowl, sift together flour, baking powder and salt. Stir in milk, oil and egg yolks until mixture is smooth. In a separate bowl, beat egg whites until soft peaks form. Gently fold egg whites into batter. Spray preheated waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray. Pour mix onto hot waffle iron. Cook until golden; serve hot.
Sift together flour, baking powder, soda, salt, and spices. In a large bowl, beat eggs until light and fluffy.  Add sugar, and continue beating until well blended.  Stir in oil, vanilla, zucchini, nuts, chocolate chips, and orange rind.  Blend in sifted ingredients.  Turn batter into two greased 9 x 5 inch loaf pans. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 50 minutes, or until bread tests done.  Remove loaves from pans, and cool.  Chill before slicing.
In a large bowl, stir together flour, baking powder, sugar and salt. Add milk, eggs and oil; mix well. Spray preheated waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray. Pour mix onto hot waffle iron. Cook until golden brown.
Combine flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a large bowl.  Set bowl aside.  In a separate bowl, whisk together the skim milk, melted butter, eggs, sugar, and vanilla.  Make a well in the center of the dry ingredients and stir in the wet ingredients, being careful not to over mix the batter.  Gently fold in the banana, chocolate chips, and nuts. Heat a large skillet over medium heat, and coat with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 cupfuls of batter onto the skillet, and cook until bubbles appear on the surface. Flip with a spatula, and cook until browned on the other side.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray one 9x5x3 inch loaf pan with a non-stick cooking spray. In a medium bowl, beat the white sugar and margarine or butter until smooth and creamy. Beat in the eggs, water and bananas with the sugar mixture until it is well blended. Mix in the flour, baking soda, salt and baking powder just until the mixture is moistened.  Be sure to scrape the sides of the bowl to blend all ingredients. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degree C) for about 60 minutes.  Bread is done when the top is firm to the touch and a golden brown color. Time will vary according to loaf size and oven type. When bread is removed from oven, allow it to cool on it's side for 10 minutes, then remove from pan and let cool on a rack. This bread is also excellent if you add mini chocolate chips or small fruit pieces to the mix just before baking.
Coat a 9x13 inch baking dish with cooking spray. Arrange 1/2 of the cubed raisin bread in the bottom of the dish. Sprinkle the cream cheese evenly over the bread, and top with the apples. If you like extra raisins, add them now. Top with remaining bread. In a large bowl, beat the eggs with the cream, butter, and maple syrup. Pour over the bread mixture. Cover with plastic wrap, and press down so that all bread pieces are soaked. Refrigerate at least 2 hours. Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Bake 45 minutes in the preheated oven. Let stand for 10 minutes before serving.
In medium bowl, toss 4 teaspoons flour with the  grated cheese. Sprinkle mixture into the  pie shell. On top of cheese, sprinkle 1/2 cup of diced ham. In medium bowl, combine eggs, milk or cream, and then add salt and mustard powder. Beat until smooth and pour over cheese and ham. Put piece of plastic wrap large enough to overlap sides over top of quiche, then a piece of foil, and seal well around the edges. (plastic keeps the foil from sticking to the food). Place prepared quiche in freezer. When ready to prepare, preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C.) Remove foil and plastic wrap. Put foil around edge of crust to protect it. Bake in the preheated oven for 60 minutes, or until filling is set and crust is golden brown. Garnish with parsley and pimiento if desired
Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F (220 degrees C). Arrange the potatoes and onions in a greased 9x13 inch baking dish so that they are evenly distributed. Season with garlic powder, salt and chili powder. Drizzle with olive oil. Stir to coat potatoes and onions with oil and spices. Bake for 35 to 40 minutes in the preheated oven, until potatoes are fork tender and slightly crispy. Stir every 10 minutes. When done, sprinkle with cheese. Wait about 5 minutes for the cheese to melt before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease one 8x8 inch casserole dish and set aside. Beat together the eggs and milk. Add seasoning salt, ham, Cheddar cheese, Mozzarella cheese and minced onion. Pour into prepared casserole dish. Bake uncovered at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 40 to 45 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, cream together the butter and sugar until light and fluffy. Stir in the eggs one at a time, beating well with each addition. Stir in vanilla and banana. In a separate bowl, sift together flour, baking powder, and salt. Blend the banana mixture into the flour mixture; stir just to combine. Fold in walnuts. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven for 1 hour, until a toothpick inserted into center of loaf comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Melt butter in a medium baking dish. In a medium bowl, mix flour, milk, eggs and salt. Pour the mixture into the prepared baking dish. Bake on center rack in the preheated oven for 30 to 40 minutes, until golden brown.
Beat together oil and sugar. Mix in eggs, milk, salt, baking powder, oatmeal. Beat well then stir in raisins. Pour into a lightly grease pie pan. Sprinkle with brown sugar and cinnamon. Refrigerate overnight. The next morning, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in preheated oven until firm, about 35 minutes. Serve hot.
Place the rolled oats into the jar of a blender and blend until the texture resembles coarse flour. Whisk together the blended oats, whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour, brown sugar, dry milk powder, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a bowl; set aside. Whisk together the egg, milk, vegetable oil, and vanilla. Stir in the mashed banana. Pour the egg mixture into the flour mixture and stir just until moistened. Let the batter stand for 5 minutes. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 2 minutes. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter.
Grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. In a large bowl, mix together brown sugar and 1 teaspoon cinnamon. Mix in melted butter. Stir in apples and raisins until evenly coated. Pour into prepared pan. Arrange bread slices in an even layer over apples. In the bowl, whisk together eggs, milk, vanilla and 2 teaspoons cinnamon. Pour over bread, making sure every slice is fully soaked. Cover with aluminum foil, and refrigerated overnight. Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Remove dish from refrigerator while the oven is heating. Bake covered for 40 minutes. Remove cover, and bake 5 minutes. Let stand 5 minutes before serving.
Place bacon in a large skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain and set aside. Add the mushrooms and onion to the skillet; cook and stir until the onion has softened and turned translucent and the mushrooms are tender, about 5 minutes.
                                    Watch Now Grease a 9x13-inch casserole dish with the tablespoon of butter. Place potatoes in bottom of prepared dish.  Sprinkle with salt, garlic salt, and pepper. Top with crumbled bacon, then add the onions and mushrooms.
                                    Watch Now In a mixing bowl, beat the eggs with the milk and parsley. Pour the beaten eggs over the casserole and top with grated cheese. Cover and refrigerate overnight.
                                    Watch Now Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C).
                                    Watch Now Bake in preheated oven for 1 hour or until set.
                                    Watch Now
Melt the bacon grease in a non-stick pan over low heat. Cut a 1 1/2 to 2-inch hole from the center of the bread slice; lay in the hot skillet. When the side facing down is lightly toasted, about 2 minutes, flip and crack the egg into the hole; season with salt and pepper. Continue to cook until the egg is cooked and mostly firm. Flip again and cook 1 minute more to assure doneness on both sides. Serve immediately.
In a large bowl, stir together pancake mix and cinnamon.  Make a well in the center of the pancake mix. Add the eggs, applesauce, lemon juice and milk; stir until smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour two 8x4 inch loaf pans. In a large bowl combine the flour, brown sugar, white sugar, pumpkin puree, oil, coconut milk, baking soda, salt, ground nutmeg and ground cinnamon. Mix until all of the flour is gone. Fold in the nuts and flaked coconut. Pour batter into the prepared pans. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 1 hour and 15 minutes or until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean. Remove from oven and cover loaves with foil tightly. Allow to steam for 10 minutes. Remove foil and turn out onto a cooling rack. Tent lightly with the foil and allow to cool completely.
Place ingredients in the pan of the bread machine. Select the Dough setting, and press Start. Mix the bread for 3 to 5 minutes until the bananas are mashed and all ingredients are thoroughly combined. If necessary, use a rubber spatula to push the dough from the sides of the bread pan. When 3 to 5 minutes have passed on the clock display, press Stop. Do not continue mixing. Smooth out the top of the loaf with the rubber spatula. Select the Bake setting, and press Start. The Bake cycle time may vary with machines, but should be about 50 minutes. To test the bread for doneness, insert a toothpick into the center top. Remove the toothpick. If the bread is done, the toothpick will come out clean. If there is batter on the toothpick, reset the machine on Bake and continue to bake an additional 10 to 15 minutes. Test again with the toothpick to ensure the bread is completely baked. Remove the pan from the machine, but allow the bread to remain in the pan for 10 minutes. Remove the bread to cool completely on a wire rack.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease 10 muffin cups. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until crisp and evenly brown. Drain, crumble, and set aside. Place the cream cheese, milk, and eggs in a medium bowl, and beat until smooth with an electric mixer set on Low. Stir in Swiss cheese and green onion, and set aside. Separate dough into 10 biscuits. Press into the bottom and sides of each muffin cup, forming 1/4 inch rims. Sprinkle half of the bacon into the bottoms of the dough-lined muffin cups. Spoon about 2 tablespoons of the cream cheese mixture into each cup. Bake 20 to 25 minutes in the preheated oven, until filling is set and rims of the tarts are golden brown. Sprinkle with the remaining bacon, and lightly press into the filling. Remove from pan, and serve warm.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Cream together shortening and sugar.  Add eggs one at a time, beating well after each addition.  Mix in bananas, buttermilk, and vanilla.  Mix in flour, baking powder, and soda.  Stir in nuts if desired. Pour batter into two greased 9x5 inch pans. Bake for 50 to 60 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a toothpick inserted into the center of the loaf comes out clean.
In a small bowl, stir together the brown sugar, melted butter, and corn syrup. Pour into a greased 9x13 inch baking dish, and spread evenly. Sprinkle pecans over the sugar mixture. Arrange the bread slices in the bottom of the dish so they are in a snug single layer. In a medium bowl, whisk together the orange zest, orange juice, milk, sugar, cinnamon, vanilla, egg whites, and eggs. Pour this mixture over the bread, pressing on the bread slices to help absorb the liquid. Cover and refrigerate for at least one hour, or overnight. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F (175 degrees C ). Remove the cover from the baking dish, and let stand for 20 minutes at room temperature. Bake for 35 minutes in the preheated oven, until golden brown. Dust with confectioners' sugar before serving.
In a blender, blend the milk, yogurt, banana, protein supplement, flax seed, honey, and strawberries until smooth.
In a large bowl, combine butter, egg, milk and apple. In a separate bowl, sift together flour, baking powder, cinnamon and sugar. Stir flour mixture into apple mixture, just until combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Grind the oats in a blender or food processor until fine. In a large bowl, combine ground oats, whole wheat flour, baking soda, baking powder, and salt. In another bowl, combine buttermilk, milk, oil, egg, and sugar with an electric mixer until smooth. Mix wet ingredients into dry with a few swift strokes. Stir in nuts, if desired. Lightly oil a skillet or griddle, and preheat it to medium heat. Ladle 1/3 cup of the batter onto the hot skillet; cook the pancakes for 2 to 4 minutes per side, or until brown.
Melt 1 tablespoon butter in a small skillet over medium heat. Using a glass or cookie cutter, create a hole in the middle of the bread, removing the center so it is perfectly circular. Butter the bread lightly on both sides and lightly fry it on one side, and then turn it over.  Crack the egg into the hole in the middle of the bread and fry quickly.  Be careful that the bread does not burn. Serve warm.
Place the banana, grapes, yogurt, apple and spinach into a blender. Cover, and blend until smooth, stopping frequently to push down anything stuck to the sides. Pour into glasses and serve.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Lightly grease a 5x9 inch loaf pan. In a large mixing bowl, cream together butter and sugar. Add eggs; beat well. Stir in peanut butter, bananas, flour and baking soda until blended. Fold in walnuts. Pour into prepared pan. Bake at 325 degrees F (165 degrees C) for 70 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted into center of the loaf comes out clean. Remove to a wire rack to cool.
Crack the eggs into a large resealable freezer bag. Press out most of the air, and seal. Shake or squeeze to beat the eggs. Open the bag, and add the ham, cheese, onion, green pepper, tomato, salsa, and mushrooms. Squeeze out as much of the air as you can, and seal the bag. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Place up to 8 bags at a time into the boiling water. Cook for exactly 13 minutes. Open the bag, and let the omelet roll out onto a plate. The omelet should roll out easily.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown, but still flexible. Wrap bacon slice around the inside of a muffin cup. Place a teaspoon of butter (or bacon grease) in the bottom of muffin cup. Drop in egg. Bake in preheated oven for 10 to 15 minutes. Place 1/4 slice of cheese over egg, and continue cooking until cheese is melted and egg is cooked.
Place sweet potatoes in a medium saucepan of boiling water, and cook until tender but firm, about 15 minutes. Drain, and immediately immerse in cold water to loosen skins. Drain, remove skins, chop, and mash. In a medium bowl, sift together flour, baking powder, salt, and nutmeg. Mix mashed sweet potatoes, eggs, milk and butter in a separate medium bowl. Blend sweet potato mixture into the flour mixture to form a batter. Preheat a lightly greased griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter mixture onto the prepared griddle by heaping tablespoonfuls, and cook until golden brown, turning once with a spatula when the surface begins to bubble.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking pan. In a blender, combine eggs, milk, flour, salt and pepper; cover and process until smooth. Pour into prepared baking pan. Bake in preheated oven until set, about 20 minutes. Sprinkle with cheese. Carefully loosen edges of omelet from pan. Starting from the short edge of the pan, carefully roll up omelet. Place omelet seam side down on a serving plate and cut into 6 equal sized pieces.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Line pastry with a double layer of aluminum foil. Bake in preheated oven for 8 minutes. Remove foil and bake for 4 to 5 minutes more, or until crust is set. Reduce oven temperature to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Remove bacon from pan, crumble and set aside. Reserve 2 tablespoons bacon grease in skillet. Cook onion in reserved drippings until tender; drain and set aside. In a large bowl, mix together eggs, milk and salt. Stir in bacon and onion. In a separate bowl, toss cheese and flour together. Add cheese to egg mixture; stir well. Pour mixture into hot pastry shell. Bake in preheated oven for 35 to 40 minutes, or until knife inserted into center comes out clean. If necessary, cover edges of crust with foil to prevent burning. Let quiche cool for 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, and spread evenly in the bottom of a 9x13 inch pan. Spread cheese over sausage. In large bowl, beat together milk and eggs.  Pour over cheese. (May be refrigerated overnight at this point).Top with tater tots. Bake in preheated oven for 35 to 45 minutes. Cool for 5 to 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease and flour two 8x4 inch bread loaf pans. In a large bowl, beat eggs until light yellow and frothy. Add oil, brown sugar, white sugar, grated zucchini, bananas, and vanilla; blend together until well combined. Stir in the flour, cinnamon, baking powder, baking soda, and salt. Mix in the cranberries and nuts. Divide the batter evenly between the two prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, about 50 minutes. Allow to cool in the loaf pans on a wire rack before removing and serving.
Mix together 3/4 cup sugar and cinnamon. Quarter the biscuits with kitchen shears.  Dip shears in water after each cut to keep the biscuits from getting too sticky.  Dip biscuits into sugar mixture, and place in a greased tube pan.  Do this until all biscuits are used. Melt butter or margarine, and mix in 3/4 cup sugar.  Pour mixture over biscuits. Bake in a preheated 350 degree F (175 degrees C) oven for 30 to 35 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain (reserving 1 tablespoon of grease) crumble bacon and set aside.  Heat reserved bacon grease in skillet and saute onion until soft. In a large bowl, beat together eggs, milk, flour, parsley, thyme, salt and pepper. Add bacon, onion, mozzarella and cheddar cheese; mix well. Pour mixture into pie crust. Bake in preheated oven for 45 minutes, or until lightly brown on top and firm in the middle. Serve warm.
Prepare sausage according to package directions. cool slightly and cut into 1/2-inch pieces; set aside. In a bowl, combine hash browns, butter, salt and pepper; divide evenly into 12 greased muffin cups. Press mixture onto sides and bottom of muffin cups. Bake at 400 degrees F for 12 minutes or until lightly browned. Remove from oven; divide sausage pieces into muffin cups. In a bowl, combine eggs, cheese and bell pepper. Spoon mixture evenly into muffin cups. Sprinkle with chives or onion. Return to oven, bake 13-15 minutes or until set. Serve.
Line a large baking sheet with 2 sheets of aluminum foil, making sure pan is completely covered. Arrange bacon strips on the prepared baking sheet, keeping at least 1/2-inch space between strips. Place pan in the cold oven. Heat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Cook bacon for 14 minutes. Transfer cooked bacon to paper towel-lined plates. Let cool for 5 minutes for bacon to crisp.
Place bread cubes in a lightly greased 9x13 inch baking pan. In a large bowl, beat cream cheese with an electric mixer at medium speed until smooth. Add eggs one at a time, mixing well after each addition. Stir in milk, half and half, maple syrup, and vanilla until mixture is smooth. Pour cream cheese mixture over the bread; cover, and refrigerate overnight. The next morning, remove souffle from refrigerator, and let stand at room temperature for 30 minutes. Meanwhile,  preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake, uncovered, for 30 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean. Sprinkle with confectioners' sugar, and serve warm.
Spread croutons on bottom of greased 9x13 inch baking dish. Crumble sausage into medium skillet. Cook over medium heat until browned, stirring occasionally. Drain off any drippings. Spread sausage over croutons. In a large bowl, whisk together eggs and milk until well blended. Stir in soup, spinach, mushrooms, cheeses and mustard. Pour egg mixture over sausage and croutons. Refrigerate overnight. The next morning, preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Bake in preheated oven for 50 to 55 minutes or until set and lightly browned on top. Garnish with parsley sprigs and serve hot.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Spray a bread pan with non-stick cooking spray, and lightly dust with flour. In a large bowl, beat eggs and sugar in a large bowl until light and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Beat in bananas, applesauce, milk, oil and vanilla. In a separate bowl, sift together flour, baking powder, baking soda and salt. Stir flour mixture into banana mixture, mixing just until blended. Fold in walnuts. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in preheated pan until golden and a toothpick inserted into center of the loaf comes out clean, about 1 hour. Turn bread out onto a wire rack and let cool.
In a medium bowl, combine flour and baking powder. Stir in milk and egg yolk until smooth. In a large glass or metal mixing bowl, beat egg whites until stiff peaks form. Fold 1/3 of the whites into the batter, then quickly fold in remaining whites until no streaks remain. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Cook until pancakes are golden brown on both sides; serve hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour a 9x5-inch loaf pan. In a medium bowl, toss blueberries in 2 tablespoons flour. Gently stir blueberries together with oats, nuts, 1 1/2 cups flour, baking soda, and salt. In a large bowl, cream shortening. Gradually add sugar, beating until light and fluffy. Add eggs one at a time, beating well after each addition. Stir in mashed banana. Add blueberry mixture to creamed mixture, and stir just until moistened. Spoon batter into the prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven until a wooden toothpick comes out clean when inserted in the center of the loaf, 50 to 55 minutes. Cool in pan for 10 minutes. Remove from pan, and cool completely on a wire rack.
In a medium bowl, combine flour, sugar, salt, baking powder and cinnamon. In a separate large bowl, beat together eggs, milk, corn syrup, butter and vanilla extract. Stir in the flour mixture. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium low heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot. While pancakes are cooking, mix the icing. Combine confectioners' sugar, vanilla extract and enough milk to make a liquid frosting. Drizzle frosting on hot pancakes before serving.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Lightly grease an 8x4 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, cream the shortening and sugar. Sift in the flour, baking soda and salt. Blend in the mashed bananas. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven for 60 minutes, or until a knife inserted into center of loaf comes out clean.
In a saucepan, stir together the brown sugar, butter and water. Bring to a boil, then reduce heat to low, and simmer for 10 minutes, stirring frequently. Pour the brown sugar mixture into a 9x13 inch baking dish, and tilt the dish to cover the entire bottom. Place peaches in a layer over the sugar coating, then top with slices of French bread. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs and vanilla. Slowly pour over the bread slices to coat evenly. Sprinkle cinnamon over the top. Cover and refrigerate for 8 hours or overnight. Remove the dish from the refrigerator about 30 minutes before baking to come to room temperature. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake for 25 to 30 minutes in the preheated oven, or until the bread is golden brown. Spoon out portions to serve.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Press hash browns onto the bottom and sides of a 9 inch pie dish. Drizzle with melted butter, and sprinkle with seasoning salt. Bake in preheated oven for 20 minutes, or until beginning to brown. In a small bowl, combine ham, onion and shredded cheese. In a separate bowl, whisk together eggs, milk, salt, pepper, and a little seasoning salt. When crust is ready, spread ham mixture on the bottom, then cover with egg mixture. Reduce oven temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C.) Bake in preheated oven for 20 to 25 minutes, or until filling is puffed and golden brown.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Combine the flour, baking powder, cinnamon, allspice, ginger, salt, and brown sugar in a mixing bowl. In a separate bowl, stir together the pumpkin, milk, and egg yolks. Whip the egg whites in a clean dry bowl until soft peaks form. Stir the flour mixture and 1/4 cup melted butter to the pumpkin mixture, stirring just to combine. Use a whisk or rubber spatula to fold 1/3 of the egg whites into the batter, stirring gently until incorporated. Fold in the remaining egg whites. Cook waffles according to manufacturer's instructions. To make the syrup, stir together the sugar, cornstarch, and cinnamon in a saucepan. Stir in the apple cider and lemon juice. Cook over medium heat until mixture begins to boil; boil until the syrup thickens. Remove from heat and stir in the 2 tablespoons of butter until melted. Serve warm.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease two 8x4 inch loaf pans. Mix the flour, sugar, baking soda, baking powder and salt. Add the eggs, sour cream and raisins and mix until just combined. Distribute batter evenly between the two pans. Bake loaves at 325 degrees F (165 degrees C) for 1 hour.
Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add oats then cook and stir until starting to brown and crisp, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat and spread out on a cookie sheet to cool. Melt the butter in the same pan over medium heat. Stir in the honey and brown sugar; cook, stirring constantly, until bubbly. Return the oats to the pan. Cook and stir for another 5 minutes or so. Pour out onto the cookie sheet and spread to cool. Once cool, transfer to an airtight container and stir in the almonds and dried cranberries. Any additional nuts and fruit can be stirred in at this time also.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Beat together flour, salt, half-and-half and eggs in a medium bowl. Place Swiss cheese flat in the pie crust. Arrange spinach evenly over Swiss cheese, then cover with mushrooms. Pour the flour and egg mixture over mushrooms. Cover with flaked ham and top with Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven 45 to 55 minutes, until surface is golden brown.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). In a large bowl, stir oats, nuts and sunflower kernels together. In a separate bowl, mix together oil, honey, vanilla and cinnamon. Add to dry ingredients; mix well. Spread mixture onto two ungreased baking sheets. Bake in preheated oven, for 10 minutes, remove from oven and stir. Return to oven and continue baking until golden, about 10 minutes. Remove from oven and let cool completely before storing.
In a medium bowl, stir together the flour, brown sugar, baking powder and salt. Pour in the milk, oil, egg and vanilla, and mix until well blended. Stir in the strawberries. Heat a large skillet or griddle over medium heat, and coat with butter or cooking spray. Pour batter into desired size of pancakes. Flip with a spatula when bubbles appear in the center. Cook until golden brown on the other side.
In a bowl, beat the eggs, and stir in the baby spinach and Parmesan cheese. Season with onion powder, nutmeg, salt, and pepper. In a small skillet coated with cooking spray over medium heat, cook the egg mixture about 3 minutes, until partially set. Flip with a spatula, and continue cooking 2 to 3 minutes. Reduce heat to low, and continue cooking 2 to 3 minutes, or to desired doneness.
Place milk, sugar, eggs, oil and vanilla in the blender. Add flour and baking powder. Blend until smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Sift flour and powdered sugar into a mixing bowl.  Add eggs, milk, butter, vanilla, and salt; beat until smooth. Heat a lightly greased 6 inch skillet. Add about 3 tablespoons batter. Tilt skillet so that batter spreads to almost cover the bottom of skillet.  Cook until lightly browned; turn and brown the other side.  Repeat process with remaining batter, grease skillet as needed. Melt 1/4 cup butter in a large skillet.  Stir in brown sugar, 1/4 teaspoon cinnamon and nutmeg.  Stir in cream and cook until slightly thickened.  Add half the bananas at a time to skillet; cook for 2 to 3 minutes, spooning sauce over them.  Remove from heat. Roll a crepe around each banana half and place on serving platter. Spoon sauce over crepes.  Top with whipped cream and a pinch of cinnamon.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Roll pie dough to fit a 9 inch pie plate. Place bottom crust in pie plate and chill for at least 20 minutes before baking. Line the chilled pie crust with foil and fill halfway up with dried beans, rice, or baking weights. Bake in the preheated oven for 7 minutes. Remove foil and weights and bake until golden brown, about 5 minutes. Reduce oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Cook bacon in a skillet over medium heat until browned and cooked through, 8 to 10 minutes. Remove from pan to drain. Blot out some of the oil from the skillet, leaving 1 to 2 teaspoons. Add leeks, onion, salt, black pepper, and cayenne pepper. Cook and stir until tender and browned, 5 to 7 minutes. Set aside. Whisk eggs, egg yolks, cream, and milk together in a large bowl. Add thyme and stir to combine. Sprinkle 1/3 onion-leek mixture on the bottom of the baked crust. Top with 1/3 cooked bacon and 1/3 Gruyere cheese. Ladle in half the egg mixture. Sprinkle with 1/3 the onion-leek mixture, 1/3 bacon, and 1/3 cheese. Pour in remaining egg mixture and top with remaining onion-leek mixture, bacon, and cheese. Bake filled quiche in the preheated oven until browned and set, but no longer jiggly in the center, 40 to 45 minutes. Allow to cool slightly before serving.
In a food processor or in a large bowl, combine the whole wheat flour, white flour, wheat germ or oats, baking powder, baking soda, brown sugar, and salt. Cut the butter into small pieces with a knife, and add the butter to the flour-mixture. Mix until the mixture has a sand-like consistency. Make a well in the center of the flour-butter mixture, and add the buttermilk and eggs. Stir until the liquids are fully incorporated. Heat a frying pan over medium heat and grease the surface with 1 tablespoon of butter or oil. Ladle the batter onto the surface to form 4 inch pancakes. Once bubbles form on the top of the pancakes, flip them over, and cook them on the other side for about 2 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 9x5-inch loaf pans. Beat together eggs, sugar, and oil. Blend in the grated zucchini, and then the sour cream. Mix in the flour, baking powder, soda, and cinnamon. Stir in chocolate chips or raisins (see Cook's Note). Pour batter into prepared pans. Bake in preheated oven until a tester inserted in the center of each loaf comes out clean, about 80 minutes. Cool on wire rack.
Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking pan. Lay crescent rolls flat in the bottom of the pan. Combine cooked sausage, cheese, eggs, milk, salt and pepper; pour over crescent rolls. Bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes, until bubbly and rolls are baked.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (205 degrees C). Grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Melt the butter in a skillet over medium heat, and cook the onion until tender. Spread Cheddar cheese in the bottom of the prepared baking dish. Layer with mushrooms, olives, sauteed onion, ham, and jalapeno peppers. In a bowl, scramble eggs together with milk, and season with salt and pepper. Pour egg mixture over ingredients, but do not stir. Bake, uncovered, in the preheated oven for 30 minutes, or until no longer runny in the center and slightly brown on top. Allow to cool slightly, then cut into squares and serve.
Combine flour, brown sugar, white sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a large mixing bowl, and whisk together for two minutes to aerate. In a separate bowl, combine pumpkin puree, cinnamon, ginger, allspice, egg, milk, 2 tablespoons of vegetable oil, lemon juice, and lemon zest. Mix in the flour mixture, and stir just until moistened. (Do not overmix.) Coat skillet with 1 teaspoon vegetable oil over medium heat. Pour batter into skillet 1/4 cup at a time, and cook the pancakes until golden brown, about 3 minutes on each side.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, cream together the shortening and sugar until light and fluffy. Stir in the eggs one at a time, beating well with each addition, then stir in the banana and vanilla. In a separate bowl, sift together flour, baking soda and salt. Beat into creamed mixture. Stir in oats and nuts. Pour into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven for 50 to 55 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted into the center of the loaf comes out clean.
Grease a 9x13 inch baking pan. In a small bowl, stir together the  melted butter, brown sugar and cinnamon. Spread the sugar mixture into the bottom of the prepared pan. Spread the apple pie filling evenly over the sugar mixture. Layer the bread slices on top of the filling, pressing down as you go.  In a medium bowl, beat the eggs with the milk and vanilla. Slowly pour this mixture over the bread, making sure that it is completely absorbed. Cover the pan with aluminum foil and refrigerate overnight. In the morning, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place covered pan into the oven and bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 60 to 75 minutes. When done remove from oven and turn on broiler.  Remove foil and drizzle maple syrup on top of the egg topping; broil for 2 minutes, or until the syrup begins to caramelize. Remove from the oven and let stand for 10 minutes, then cut into squares. Invert the pan onto a serving tray or baking sheet so the apple filling is on top. Serve hot.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake the pie crust for about 10 minutes, until just starting to brown. Remove from the oven, and allow to cool. In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs, cream, salt, pepper, and hot sauce. Stir in shredded cheese, onion and imitation crab. Pour into the pie shell. Bake for 25 to 30 minutes in the preheated oven, then turn off the oven, but leave the door closed. Leave quiche in the oven for an additional 20 to 30 minutes until firm. This will give it a smoother texture.
Heat 5 inches of oil in a deep-fryer to 365 degrees F (180 degrees C). While oil is heating, make the batter: In a medium bowl, whisk together the egg and water. Combine the flour, baking powder, salt and pepper; whisk into the egg mixture until smooth. Set aside in the refrigerator. Assemble sandwiches by placing one slice of turkey on one slice of bread, a slice of ham on another, then sandwich them with the Swiss cheese in the middle. Cut sandwiches into quarters, and secure with toothpicks. Dip each sandwich quarter in the batter so that all sides are coated. Deep fry in the hot oil until golden brown on all sides. Remove toothpicks and arrange on a serving tray. Dust with confectioners' sugar just before serving.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Line baking sheets with parchment paper. Pulse the walnuts in a food processor several times to chop; continue processing until the walnuts are ground into flour; transfer to a bowl. Mix in the rolled oats, whole wheat flour, flax meal, baking soda, salt, and cinnamon until thoroughly combined. Combine the almond butter, canola oil, agave nectar, brown sugar, egg, and vanilla extract in the food processor and process a few seconds to blend the ingredients well; transfer the almond butter mixture to a large bowl and fold in the dried cherries and chocolate chips. Mix the walnut-oatmeal mixture into the almond butter mixture (dough will be very thick). Scoop up heaping teaspoons of dough, and form into balls; lay the dough balls onto the prepared baking sheets, about 2 inches apart. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned, 8 to 10 minutes. Remove from oven and flatten the cookies with a spatula. Allow to cool for about 5 minutes on the baking sheets before removing to finish cooling on wire racks.
Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Remove bacon slices, reserving grease. Crumble bacon and set aside. Add potatoes to bacon grease and season with garlic salt, seasoned salt and black pepper. Cook until potatoes are soft. When potatoes are tender, add crumbled bacon. Pour eggs over potatoes and cook until firm. Spread with cheese and cover with lid until melted.
Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil.  Add potatoes and cook until tender but still firm, about 15 minutes. Drain, cool cut into 1/2 inch cubes. In a large skillet, heat 1 tablespoon olive oil over medium high heat. Add onion and green pepper. Cook, stirring often, until soft; about 5 minutes. Transfer to a plate and set aside. Pour remaining 2 tablespoons of oil into the skillet and turn heat to medium-high. Add potato cubes, salt, paprika and black pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, until potatoes are browned; about 10 minutes. Stir in the onions, green peppers and parsley and cook for another minute. Serve hot.
Place half of the bread cubes in a lightly greased 9x13 inch baking pan. Sprinkle cream cheese on top of bread cubes. Top with 1 cup blueberries and remaining bread. In a large bowl, beat together eggs, milk and maple syrup. Pour egg mixture over bread. Cover pan and refrigerate overnight. The next morning, remove pan from refrigerator 30 minutes before baking. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Cover pan with aluminum foil and bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes. Uncover pan and bake for an additional 30 minutes, until golden brown and center is set. To make Sauce: In a saucepan, combine sugar and cornstarch, add water. Boil over medium heat for 3 minutes, stirring constantly.  Stir in blueberries and reduce heat. Simmer 8 to 10 minutes, or until the berries have burst.  Stir in butter until melted. Serve the sauce over squares of french toast.
Spray bread machine pan with vegetable oil spray. Premix ingredients in order listed.  Place mixture in bread machine pan. Select the Quick Bread/Cake cycle.  Press Start. Check after 1 minute to see if mixture is well blended. Cook until cake cycle stops.  Remove pan, and cool completely before removing bread from pan.
Preheat oven to 325 F. In large skillet, cook sausage over medium-high heat, stirring frequently until thoroughly cooked and no longer pink. In large mixing bowl, combine eggs, milk, mustard and salt; stir well. Distribute half the bread evenly in a buttered 9 x 13 x 2 inch baking dish. Sprinkle with half the pepper, half the cheese, half the sausage and half of each optional ingredient. Repeat layering using remaining bread, pepper, cheese, sausage and optional ingredients. Pour egg mixture evenly over casserole. Bake uncovered for 55-60 minutes, or until eggs are set. Tent with foil if top begins to brown too quickly.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Sift the flour, baking soda, salt, cinnamon and nutmeg into a large bowl. Mix in the pumpkin, brown sugar, buttermilk, egg and butter until well blended. Pour into a 9x5 inch loaf pan and smooth the top. Bake for 1 hour in the preheated oven, or until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean.
Place ham in food processor, and pulse until finely ground. Mix together ham, green onions, and green peppers. Spoon 1/3 cup of the ham mixture and 3 tablespoons shredded cheese onto each tortilla, then roll up. Carefully place filled tortillas, seam side down, in a greased 9x13 baking dish. In a medium bowl, mix together eggs, cream, and milk, flour, garlic powder, and hot pepper sauce.  Pour egg mixture over tortillas.  Cover, and refrigerate overnight. The next morning, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake, uncovered, in preheated oven for 50 to 60 minutes, or until set. Sprinkle casserole with remaining 1 cup shredded cheese. Bake about 3 minutes more, or until cheese melts. Let stand a least 10 minutes before serving.
Mix the buttermilk, vegetable oil, and vanilla extract in a bowl; stir in the sugar. Whisk in the flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt, combining the batter with just a few strokes to moisten. Leave the lumps. In a separate bowl, whisk the egg and lemon juice together; gently stir into the batter. Refrigerate the batter for at least 30 minutes, up to 1 hour. Heat a large skillet over medium heat and grease with the butter. Pour 1/3 cup of batter per pancake into the skillet and cook until bubbles appear on the surface, about 2 minutes. Flip with spatula and brown the other side, about 2 more minutes.
Grease an 8x4 inch loaf pan.  Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a large mixing bowl, sift together flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, and sugar.  Add butter, eggs, nuts, and mashed banana. Beat until well blended. Pour batter into prepared pan and bake about 1 hour, or until a toothpick inserted in the center of the loaf comes out clean.
Whisk flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl until evenly combined. Whisk buttermilk and butter together in a separate bowl; add eggs. Stir buttermilk mixture into flour mixture until just combined and batter is slightly lumpy; add vanilla extract. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Pour enough batter into the preheated waffle iron to reach 1/2 inch from the edge. Cook according to manufacturer's instructions.
Remove baking pan from machine. Place yeast, flour, ground cinnamon, salt, white sugar, 2 tablespoons butter and water in the order that is recommended for the bread maker. Make sure that no liquid comes in contact with the yeast.  Select dough cycle and press start. When dough is complete, place dough on floured surface and knead 10 to 12 times. In a medium saucepan on low heat, melt one cup of butter, stir in brown sugar and raisins ( 1/4 cup of chopped nuts is good too!). Stir until smooth.  Remove from heat. Cut dough in one inch chunks. Drop one chunk at a time into the butter sugar mixture. Thoroughly coat dough pieces, then layer them loosely in a greased Bundt or tube pan, staggering layers so you're plopping each dough chunk over a space between two below. Let rise in a warm, draft-free spot until dough is just over the top of the pan, 15 to 20 minutes. Bake in a preheated 375 degree F (190 degree C) oven for 20 to 25 minutes or till golden brown. Remove from oven, place a plate face down in top of the pan and, using oven mitts to hold plate on pan, turn over both until bread slides out onto plate.   Serve warm...and enjoy.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 2 quart baking dish. Arrange hash brown potatoes evenly in the bottom of the prepared dish. Sprinkle with pepperjack cheese, ham, and green onions. In a medium bowl, mix the eggs, evaporated milk, pepper, and salt. Pour the egg mixture over the potato mixture in the dish. The dish may be covered and refrigerated at this point for several hours or overnight. Bake for 40 to 45 minutes (or 55 to 60 minutes if made ahead and chilled) in the preheated oven, or until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean. Let stand 5 minutes before serving.
In a large bowl, beat together egg yolks and sugar. Beat in vanilla extract, butter and salt. Alternately mix in flour and milk until blended well. In a separate bowl, beat egg whites until they have formed soft peaks. Fold egg whites into batter and let stand for 40 minutes. Spray preheated waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray. Pour mix onto hot waffle iron. Cook until golden brown and fluffy.
In a large cast iron skillet, heat shortening over medium-high heat. Add potatoes and cook, stirring occasionally, until potatoes are golden brown. Season with salt, pepper, garlic powder and paprika. Serve hot.
Combine the hot milk, sugar, vanilla extract, and pumpkin pie spice in a blender; blend until frothy. Pour the mixture into 3 coffee mugs to about 2/3 full. Pour 2 ounces coffee into each mug. Garnish each mug with whipped topping and pumpkin pie spice.
Stir the milk, vinegar, and lemon juice together in a bowl; let stand 10 minutes to curdle. Whisk in egg, butter, and vanilla extract. In a separate bowl, mix together the flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, salt, poppy seeds, and lemon zest until well combined. Pour the milk mixture into the flour mixture and whisk a few times until the batter is mostly free of lumps. Heat a skillet over medium heat and spray with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 cup of  batter per pancake into the skillet  and cook until bubbles appear on the surface, about 2 minutes. Flip the pancakes over with a spatula and brown the other side, about 2 more minutes.
Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). In a large mixing bowl, mix together soup, milk, garlic, salt, and pepper. Stir in potatoes and kielbasa. Spoon into a 7x11 inch casserole dish. Place casserole on a baking sheet, and bake in the preheated oven for 90 minutes, or until potatoes are tender.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease 12 muffin cups, or line with paper muffin liners. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat and stir in sausage; cook and stir until sausage is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink, 10 to 15 minutes; drain. Beat eggs in a large bowl. Stir in onion, green pepper, salt, pepper, and garlic powder. Mix in sausage and Cheddar cheese. Spoon by 1/3 cupfuls into muffin cups. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted near the center comes out clean, 20 to 25 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a medium bowl, mix together eggs, milk, mayonnaise and cornstarch. Mix in the imitation crab and Swiss cheese. Pour into pie shell. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted into center of the quiche comes out clean, about 30 to 40 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease one 9 x 5 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, cream shortening and sugar together.  Mix in eggs.  Add zucchini, water, and vanilla; stir.  Blend in flour, baking soda, salt , baking powder, and pumpkin pie spice.  Stir in nuts. Divide batter in half, and add cocoa powder and chocolate chips to one of the halves.  Pour plain batter into bottom of the loaf pan.  Pour chocolate batter on top of plain batter. Bake until wooden pick inserted into center comes out clean, about 1 hour.  Cool 10 minutes, and remove from pan.  Store in refrigerator.
Combine milk, oats, sugar, cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt in a saucepan. Bring to a boil, stirring constantly for 2 minutes.
In a large bowl sift together the flour, baking powder, salt, and sugar. Make a well in the center of the bowl. In a separate bowl, mix together the egg yolks, milk, and oil. Pour into well of flour mixture and stir well. Stir just until ingredients are moistened. In a small bowl beat egg whites until stiff. Fold into batter. Cook batter in waffle iron.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a medium skillet, lightly brown sausage and drain. While sausage is still hot, add cream cheese and stir until cheese is melted and mixture is creamy. Cool completely. Separate crescent rolls and arrange into two rectangles. Form log of sausage mixture lengthwise down center of each rectangle. Fold over the long sides of pastry to cover sausage log. Place on ungreased cookie sheet, seam down. Brush with egg white and sprinkle with poppy seeds. Bake 20 minutes until crust is golden. When completely cooled, slice into one and one-half inch slices.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Squeeze any excess moisture from the potatoes and combine them with the melted butter or margarine in a small bowl. Press this mixture into the bottom and sides of an ungreased 10 inch pie pan. Bake at 425 degrees F (220 degrees C) for 25 minutes. Remove pan from oven and arrange the ham and cheese evenly over the potatoes. In a separate small bowl, beat together the eggs and the cream. Pour this over the ham and cheese. Return pan to oven and bake for 425 degrees F (220 degrees C) for 30 minutes, or until the custard has completely set.
Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Brown sausage and drain.  Separate crescent roll dough into 8 triangles. Place in an ungreased 12 inch pizza pan with points toward the center.  Press together to form a crust. Bottom of crust should be sealed and outside edge should be slightly raised. Spoon sausage over crust. Sprinkle with hash browns and top with cheddar cheese. Beat together eggs, milk, salt and pepper; pour over crust. Sprinkle with parmesan cheese. Bake in preheated oven until eggs are set, about 25 to 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease two 8x4 inch loaf pans. In large mixing bowl combine oil, sugar and eggs, beat well. Stir in pears, pecans and vanilla. In another bowl, combine flour, baking soda, baking powder, salt, cinnamon and nutmeg. Stir dry ingredients into the pear mixture; mix well. Pour batter into prepared loaf pans Bake in preheated oven for 60 minutes, until a toothpick inserted into center of a loaf comes out clean. Allow loaves to cool in pans for 10 minutes before moving to a wire rack to cool completely.
Spray 9x13-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Whisk eggs, 2 cups milk, green onions, onion powder, and salt together in a large bowl until well mixed. Layer half the Canadian bacon in the prepared baking dish. Spread English muffins over meat and top with remaining Canadian bacon. Pour egg mixture over casserole. Cover baking dish with plastic wrap and refrigerate overnight. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Sprinkle casserole with paprika; cover with aluminum foil. Bake in preheated oven until eggs are nearly set, about 30 minutes; remove foil. Continue baking until eggs are completely set, about 15 more minutes. Whisk hollandaise sauce mix with 1 cup milk in a saucepan. Add margarine and bring to a boil, stirring frequently. Reduce heat to medium-low, simmer, and stir until thickened, about 1 minute. Drizzle sauce over casserole to serve.
Stir milk and vinegar together in a bowl; set aside to 'sour' for about 5 minutes. Whisk flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk egg and butter into sour milk. Pour flour mixture into milk mixture and whisk until batter is smooth. Add cinnamon and vanilla extract to batter; mix well. Heat a large skillet over medium heat and coat with cooking spray. Drop batter, 1/4 cup per pancake, onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Crumble the sausage into a skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir until evenly brown. Set aside. Heat one skillet over medium heat, and heat another skillet over high heat. The skillet over high heat is for warming tortillas. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, salt and pepper. Spray the medium heat skillet with some cooking spray, and pour in the eggs. Cook and stir until almost firm. Add the sausage, and continue cooking and stirring until firm. Meanwhile, warm tortillas for about 45 seconds per side in the other skillet, so they are hot and crispy on the edges, but still pliable. Sprinkle a little shredded cheese onto each tortilla while it is still hot. Top with some of the scrambled egg and sausage, then add hot pepper sauce and salsa to your liking.
In a bowl, mix or sift together the rice flour, tapioca flour, potato starch, dry buttermilk powder, sugar substitute, baking powder, baking soda, salt, and xanthan gum. Stir in eggs, water, and oil until well blended and few lumps remain. Heat a large, well-oiled skillet or griddle over medium high heat. Spoon batter onto skillet and cook until bubbles begin to form. Flip, and continue cooking until golden brown on bottom. Serve immediately with condiments of your choice.
Place the eggs, milk, water, melted butter, flour, and salt in the pitcher of a blender; blend until smooth. Blend the cream cheese, confectioners' sugar, lemon juice, lemon zest, and vanilla with an electric mixer until smooth. Gently fold in the whipped cream. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or non-stick skillet over medium heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 2 tablespoons for each crepe. Tip and rotate pan to spread batter as thinly as possible. Flip over when the batter is set and the edges are beginning to brown. Cook until the other side begins to brown. Stack finished crepes on a plate, cover with a damp towel and set aside. To serve, fill each crepe with 1/4 cup sliced strawberries and 1/3 cup of the cream cheese filling, roll up and top with a small dollop of the cream cheese filling and more sliced strawberries.
Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble, and set aside. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 7x11 inch baking dish. In a large bowl, beat together the eggs and milk. Stir in the bacon, hash browns, green onions, and 1 cup shredded Cheddar cheese. Pour into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven 25 to 35 minutes, or until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean. Sprinkle the remaining Cheddar cheese on top, and continue baking for 3 to 4 minutes, or until the cheese is melted. Remove from oven, and let sit 5 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Season beaten eggs with pepper; pour into baking dish. In a large bowl, combine soup, sour cream, hash browns, ham, onion and cheese. Mix thoroughly and pour over eggs. Bake uncovered for 30 minutes. Remove and drizzle butter over top of casserole. Return to oven and bake for an additional 15 minutes, until golden.
Whisk together flour, sugar, baking powder, cinnamon, and salt in a bowl. Whisk in the milk, egg, 3 tablespoons vegetable oil, and vanilla extract until only a few lumps remain. Let the batter stand for 5 full minutes for extra fluffiness. Heat a skillet or griddle over medium heat, and brush with 1 teaspoon vegetable oil. When the oil shimmers, slowly pour about 1/4 cup of batter into the hot pan. Cook until bottom is browned, about 2 minutes, then flip and cook until the center of the pancake is set and the other side is browned, about 2 more minutes. Keep warm until serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease 8 muffin cups or line with paper liners. Beat eggs together in a large bowl. Mix ham, bell pepper, onion, salt, black pepper, and water into the beaten eggs. Pour egg mixture evenly into prepared muffin cups. Bake in the preheated oven until muffins are set in the middle, 18 to 20 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Spoon marinara sauce into the bottom of a small baking dish, about 1/4 inch high. Sprinkle with red pepper flakes,  salt, black pepper, and parsley. Make a narrow well in the center of the sauce for the eggs. Crack each egg into a ramekin, then pour into the baking dish over the marinara sauce. Sprinkle with Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese, olive oil, and cream. Season with salt and black pepper to taste. Bake in the preheated oven until yolks are just set, 10 to 12 minutes. Serve with toast.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). In a mixing bowl, combine the eggs, salt, flour and milk. (Use a blender for this step, if desired.) Melt the butter in a 9x13 inch baking pan. Pour the contents of the mixing bowl into the pan. Bake for 15 to 20 minutes until the mixture rises. Serve at once. Sprinkle lemon juice and powdered sugar on top at the table. Add fruit or whipped cream if desired.
Combine the corn syrup , butter, and brown sugar in a small saucepan and simmer until the sugar has melted.  Pour this mixture over the bottom of a greased 9x13 inch casserole dish. Place the  bread slices over the sugar-butter mixture in the dish.  In a bowl, beat together the eggs, milk, vanilla, and salt; pour this mixture over the bread.  Cover the dish and let it stand in the refrigerator overnight. The next morning, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Uncover the pan and bake for 45 minutes.  Serve while hot or warm or the French toast will harden in the pan. It can be reheated.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour two 8x4 inch loaf pans. Set aside. Sift together flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, and sugar. Stir in nuts, eggs, bananas, oil, and vanilla extract. Pour into prepared pans. Bake for 45 to 60 minutes. Cool on wire rack for 10 minutes before removing from pans.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Whisk the eggs, vanilla extract, 2 teaspoons of  cinnamon, the cloves, nutmeg, and white sugar together in a bowl; beat in the pumpkin until fully incorporated. Arrange the bread cubes in a single layer in the prepared baking dish; pour the pumpkin mixture over the bread cubes, and gently toss to coat. Stir 1/3 cup of brown sugar, 1/4 teaspoon of cinnamon, flour, and butter together with a fork in a small bowl until the mixture is crumbly; sprinkle over the bread cubes. Bake in preheated oven until golden brown on top, 30 to 40 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Place crust in a 9 inch glass pie plate. Sprinkle bacon inside of crust. In a small bowl, combine Cheddar cheese, Monterey jack cheese and flour. In a separate bowl, beat together eggs, cream, onion and green chiles. Add cheese mixture; stir well. Pour mixture into pie crust. Bake in preheated oven for 60 to 70 minutes, until set. Let stand 10 minutes before serving.
Melt two tablespoons of butter in a frying pan or skillet over medium high heat.
                                    Watch Now Beat together eggs, milk and salt. Dip bread one at a time into egg mixture and fry until light brown and egg is cooked.
                                    Watch Now After 4 slices of bread have been cooked, melt remaining 2 tablespoons butter. Cook remaining bread slices until light brown on both sides and egg is cooked.
                                    Watch Now After all bread slices have been cooked and removed from pan, add brown sugar to pan. Stir until melted and sticky. Add water and stir. Place French toast in caramel sauce. Turn to coat, then remove from pan. Serve.
                                    Watch Now
Whisk eggs and sour cream in a bowl until creamy and smooth. Mix in cheese. Season with salt and pepper. Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Pour in egg mixture; cook, stirring constantly, until eggs reach the desired consistency. Mix in basil during final minutes of cooking.
Shred potatoes into a large bowl filled with cold water. Stir until water is cloudy, drain, and cover potatoes again with fresh cold water. Stir again to dissolve excess starch. Drain potatoes well, pat dry with paper towels, and squeeze out any excess moisture. Heat clarified butter in a large non-stick pan over medium heat. Sprinkle shredded potatoes into the hot butter and season with salt, black pepper, cayenne pepper, and paprika. Cook potatoes until a brown crust forms on the bottom, about 5 minutes. Continue to cook and stir until potatoes  are browned all over, about 5 more minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease two 9x5 inch pans. In a medium bowl, mix together flour, baking soda, cinnamon, salt, and nutmeg. In a large bowl, combine eggs, sugar, strawberries, bananas, orange peel, and oil.  Beat with an electric mixer at medium speed for 2 minutes.  Add flour mixture, and stir just until moistened.  Stir in walnuts. Bake for 1 hour, or until loaves test done.  Remove to wire rack to cool.
In a medium bowl, stir together the egg, milk, and oil. Add flour, baking powder and salt, mix until smooth. Pour 1/4 cup of batter for each pancake on hot, oiled griddle. Turn when golden brown. Serve hot.
In a blender, combine banana, milk, vanilla, egg and sugar. Blend until smooth. Pour into a tall glass and top with a pinch of cinnamon.
Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble, and set aside. In a lightly greased 9x13 inch baking dish, arrange the croutons in a single layer. Layer with Cheddar cheese, Swiss cheese, and pepperjack cheese. Top with the cooked sausage. In a large bowl, beat together the eggs, half-and-half, milk, mustard, onion, salt, and pepper. Pour into the dish over the sausage. Cover, and refrigerate overnight. The next morning, bake in an oven preheated to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 45 to 60 minutes. Let sit for 20 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil.  Add potatoes and cook until tender but still firm, about 15 minutes; drain.  Meanwhile, place broccoli in a steamer over 1 inch of boiling water, and cover. Cook until tender but still firm, about 2 to 6 minutes. Drain and set aside. Mash the potatoes with milk and salt.  Brush a deep 9 inch pie dish with olive oil and press the potatoes in.  Brush with remaining olive oil.    Bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes or until lightly browned. Arrange onions, broccoli and cheese in the potato crust.  Whisk together the eggs, milk, salt, pepper and nutmeg.  Pour over broccoli and cheese. Bake in preheated oven for 30 to 40 minutes, until slightly puffed and cooked throughout.  Allow to cool for 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease and flour a 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, cream together the butter and sugar until light and fluffy. Mix in applesauce, cinnamon and one packet oatmeal. Stir in the eggs one at a time, beating well with each addition. Mix in the baking soda and flour. Pour batter into prepared pan and sprinkle with remaining packet of oatmeal. Bake in preheated oven for 60 minutes, until a toothpick inserted into center of the loaf comes out clean.
In a large deep skillet, over medium heat, combine the potatoes, corned beef, onion, and beef broth. Cover and simmer until potatoes are of mashing consistency, and the liquid is almost gone. Mix well, and serve.
Stir the milk and vinegar together, and allow to stand until curdled, about 10 minutes. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a baking sheet. In a bowl, mix together the flour, sugar, baking soda, and salt. Gradually stir the soured milk into the flour mixture until the dough just comes together, and turn the dough out onto a well-floured surface. Knead a few times, and shape into a round. Place the dough onto the prepared baking sheet. With a sharp knife, cut an X shape into the top of the dough to release steam and help the bread keep its round shape. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, about 45 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two baking sheets or line them with parchment paper. In a large bowl, using an electric mixer, beat together butter, peanut butter, brown sugar, and vanilla until creamy. Beat in eggs and water. Mix together flours, oats, wheat germ, salt, cinnamon, and baking soda. Mix into peanut butter mixture. Stir in raisins or dates (see Cook's Note). Drop by ice cream scoopfuls  2 1/2 inches apart on prepared baking sheets. Flatten slightly. Bake in preheated oven for 18 to 20 minutes. Cool on baking sheet for 2 minutes, then transfer to cooling racks. Store in an airtight container.
Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Beat milk and cream cheese together until smooth. Mix in eggs, and season with salt and pepper. Heat a lightly oiled skillet over medium high heat and cook egg mixture until eggs are almost set. Arrange the crescent rolls from one package into a rectangle shape on top of a lightly greased cookie sheet. Place rolls from remaining package along the edges of the two long sides of the rectangle, with the broad half of the rolls on top of the first layer of rolls, and the pointed ends extending over the sides of the pan. Arrange the ham in a layer down the center of the dough. Spoon the cooked egg mixture on top of the ham and then sprinkle the cheddar cheese on top of the eggs. Bring the corners of the rolls together over the cheese to form a 'braid' shape. Bake in preheated oven for 25 to 30 minutes, until cheese is melted and rolls are golden brown.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Place butter in a 10 inch cast iron skillet and heat the skillet in  oven. Beat eggs at high speed with an electric mixer. Slowly add the milk and flour. Pour batter into hot skillet. Return skillet to oven and bake for 20 minutes. It will rise like a souffle, then fall when taken out of oven. Lightly dust with powdered sugar and serve.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Melt margarine in a skillet over medium heat and cook mushrooms, spinach and onions for 5 minutes or until tender, stir continuously. Remove the skillet from heat. In a 9 inch round pan or pie plate coated with non-stick cooking spray arrange crescent roll triangles in a circle, with narrow tips hung over the rim of the pie plate about 2 inches. Press dough onto the bottom and side of the pie plate to fill in any gaps. In a medium bowl stir together the soup mix, half and half cream and eggs. Stir the cheese and  cooked vegetables into the egg mixture until blended. Pour into the prepared crust. Fold the points of dough that are hanging over the edge back in over the filling. Bake the quiche for 30 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Line pastry shell with foil. Bake in oven for 8 minutes. Remove foil and bake for an additional 5 minutes, or until crust is set and dry. Remove from oven and turn down temperature to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). In a large skillet, cook bacon until crisp. Drain and reserve 2 tablespoons of drippings. Crumble the bacon and set aside. Cook onion in skillet with reserved drippings; cook until onion is tender and then drain. In a large bowl, mix together milk, salt and eggs. Stir in bacon and onion. In a separate bowl, toss cheese and flour together, then add to egg mixture. Be sure to mix well. Pour egg mixture into pie crust. Bake in preheated oven for 35 to 40 minutes, or until knife inserted in center of quiche comes out clean. If necessary, cover edge of crust with foil while baking to prevent burning or overbrowning. Let stand for 10 minutes before serving.
Beat together egg, milk, cinnamon, vanilla and salt. Heat a lightly oiled skillet or griddle over medium heat. Soak bread slices in egg mixture for 20 second on each side, or until thoroughly coated. Cook bread until both sides are lightly browned and crisp. Serve hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 10x6-inch pan or a 12-inch pie plate. In a medium mixing bowl, combine zucchini, onion, eggs, buttermilk baking mix, vegetable oil, Parmesan cheese, marjoram, parsley and pepper; mix well. Spread into the prepared baking dish. Bake for 30 minutes, or until lightly brown.
In a large bowl, stir together the yeast and warm water. Mix in the milk, 3/8 cup sugar, 1/3 cup melted butter, salt, egg and half of the flour. Gradually mix in the remaining flour, and 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon. Turn the dough out onto a floured counter to knead as soon as it pulls together enough. Knead for 6 to 8 minutes, until smooth and elastic. Place in a large greased bowl, and turn the dough to coat. Cover, and let rise in a warm place until doubled, about 1 hour. Make the topping while the dough rises. In a medium bowl, beat 2/3 cup sugar and 1/2 cup butter until light and fluffy. Stir in the flour until the mixture is the consistency of thick paste. Divide into two parts, and place one part in a separate bowl. Mix cinnamon into one half, and vanilla into the other half. When the dough is done rising, cut into 12 even-sized pieces. Shape into balls, and place on a greased cookie sheet, spacing about 3 inches apart. Divide each bowl of topping into 6 balls, and pat flat. Place circles of topping on top of the dough balls patting down lightly. Use a knife to cut grooves in the topping like a clam shell. Cover and let rise until doubled, about 45 minutes. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake for 20 minutes, or until lightly golden brown.
In a large bowl, stir together the flour, sugar, baking powder and salt. Pour in the egg, beer and melted butter; stir with a whisk just until blended - a few lumps are okay. Heat a skillet or griddle over medium heat. Coat with vegetable oil or cooking spray. Spoon about 1/4 cup of batter onto the hot surface for each pancake. When bubbles appear on top of the pancakes, flip, and cook until browned on the other side.
Add all ingredients, except raisins, in the order given above, or as directed in your bread machine manual. Set the bread maker on Sweet Dough setting. Add the raisins at the signal, or about 5 minutes before the kneading cycle has finished.
In a large mixing bowl combine flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, and cinnamon. Make a well in the center of the bowl. In a separate bowl combine the oil, eggs, sugar, grated pears, pecans, and vanilla. Blend well. Add to well of dry ingredients. Stir until just moistened. Spoon batter into 2 greased and floured 8x5x3 inch loaf pans. Bake in a preheated 325 degree F (165 degrees C) oven for one hour and 15 minutes. Cool on wire rack before removing from the loaf pans.
In a large bowl, beat eggs well.  Add oil, brown sugar, zucchini, and vanilla; stir well.  Blend in flour, cinnamon, baking powder, soda, and salt.  Stir in raisins and nuts.  Pour batter into two greased and floured 9 x 5 inch loaf pans. Bake at 325 degrees F (165 degrees C) for 1 hour.  Cool.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Bake pie shell in preheated oven for 8 minutes. Meanwhile, heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Saute onion until soft; remove from skillet. Sprinkle tomato slices with flour and basil, then saute 1 minute on each side. In a small bowl, whisk together eggs and milk. season with salt and pepper. Spread 1 cup shredded cheese in the bottom of pie crust. Layer onions over cheese, and top with tomatoes. Cover with egg mixture. sprinkle top with remaining 1/2 cup shredded cheese. Bake in preheated oven for 10 minutes. Reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C), and bake for 15 to 20 minutes, or until filling is puffed and golden brown. Serve warm.
Place mango, banana, orange juice, and yogurt in a blender. Blend until smooth. Serve in clear glasses, and drink with a bendy straw!
Place the bacon and onion in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, and set aside. Slice each bagel into 4 thin slices. Arrange 6 bagel slices in the bottom of a lightly greased 9x13 inch baking dish. Cover with the bacon and onion mixture, followed by the Cheddar cheese. Top with remaining bagel slices. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, parsley, and pepper. Pour the egg mixture over the bagel layers. Cover, and refrigerate 8 hours or overnight. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Uncover the chilled bagel dish, and bake in the preheated oven 25 to 30 minutes, or until eggs are firm. Sprinkle with Parmesan cheese, and serve warm.
The night or several hours before, grease and flour a 9 or 10 inch tube pan. Mix brown sugar and pudding mix together.  Mix white sugar and cinnamon together. Place frozen dinner rolls in pan a layer at a time.  Sprinkle brown sugar and pudding mix over first layer of rolls. Sprinkle sugar and cinnamon mixture over the brown sugar and  pudding mixture.  Spread half the nuts and melted butter over first layer.  Repeat with the next layer. Place on counter over night. Do not cover. Next morning bake in a preheated 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) oven for 30 minutes. Let stand a few minutes and turn pan over onto serving platter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and pre-bake crusts for 10 minutes. Set aside to cool on racks. In a large skillet, saute green pepper, onion and mushrooms until onions are soft and translucent. Remove from heat and set aside. In a large bowl, mix eggs and cream together. Stir in the shredded Jack and Swiss cheese, chopped ham and sauteed vegetables. Stir in vinegar and season with tarragon, garlic powder, nutmeg, parsley, salt and pepper. Divide filling into the 2 baked pie crusts. Bake in the preheated oven for 55 to 60 minutes, or until filling is set and crusts are golden brown.
Combine the eggs and milk in the container of a blender. Add the flour, salt and sugar, and blend until smooth. Heat a skillet over medium-high heat, and coat with cooking spray or butter. Scoop about 1/4 cup of batter into the skillet, and tilt the pan to coat the bottom. Cook until the top looks dry, about 30 seconds. Carefully slide a spatula under the pancake and flip. Cook for a few seconds on the other side, just until browned. Remove to a plate, and repeat with remaining batter.
Place a slice of bread on a cutting board. Align a star-shaped cookie cutter in the center of the slice. Push the cookie cutter through the bread, rocking it gently back and forth. Once the cookie cutter makes it all the way through bread, remove bread outside the cutter. Hold the cutter down on the bread during this step to prevent the star from tearing. Use a sharp knife to trim any bread that lingers outside the cookie cutter. Gently remove the star from the cutter and put aside. Repeat on all slices of bread. In a medium bowl, beat together eggs, whipping cream, honey, salt, cinnamon, orange zest and vanilla extract. In a  griddle or frying pan, melt the butter over medium high heat. Dip both sides of the stars in the egg mixture and carefully transfer to the hot griddle. Brown on both sides and transfer to a warm plate while remaining stars cook. Serve hot.
In a small saucepan, combine 1 cup brown sugar, 1/2 cup butter and 2 tablespoons corn syrup. Cook over medium heat, stirring constantly, until thickened. Pour sauce into a 9x13 inch baking dish and sprinkle with 1/2 cup pecans. Place 6 slices of bread on top of the sauce, sprinkle with the remaining pecans and cover with the remaining 6 slices of bread. Combine eggs, milk, vanilla, nutmeg, cinnamon and salt in a blender. Pour egg mixture evenly over bread slices, cover the baking dish, and refrigerate for 8 hours or overnight. The next morning, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove the French toast from the refrigerator 30 minutes prior to baking. Bake in preheated oven for 40 to 45 minutes, until lightly brown. Drizzle sauce over the toast right before serving. To make the Caramel Sauce:  In a small saucepan, combine 1/2 cup brown sugar, 1/4 cup butter and 1 tablespoon corn syrup. Cook until thickened, stirring constantly.
Generously butter a 9x13 inch baking pan. Sprinkle pecans in bottom of pan. Place frozen dinner rolls in a single layer on top of pecans.  Sprinkle dry pudding mix over the top. Combine butter and brown sugar in a small saucepan. Heat until boiling then pour over rolls. Cover with plastic wrap or wax paper and allow to stand overnight. In the morning, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake for 20 to 30 minutes, until golden brown.
Mix together beaten eggs with the sugar.  Add milk and melted shortening or vegetable oil. Sift together flour, salt, and baking powder.  Combine mixtures, stirring only until blended.  Carefully fold in fresh or frozen blueberries and broken walnut pieces. Pour into greased 5 x 12  inch loaf pan. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 50-60 minutes.   Cool in pan but try to turn it out of pan before it is totally cool.  It will be easier to remove.  Can also be made in a normal size loaf pan or can be made into 2 pans.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). In a cup or small bowl, stir together the milk and vinegar. Let stand 10 minutes, or until curdled. In a medium bowl, stir together the flour, salt and baking soda. Stir in the curdled milk mixture until smooth. Scrape the dough out of the bowl onto a floured surface, and shape into a disc. Place the disc into a cast iron skillet. Bake for 15 minutes in the preheated oven, or until the crust feels firm to the touch.
Combine cottage cheese, flour, oil, and eggs in a large bowl. Heat a large skillet over medium heat, and coat with cooking spray. Pour 1/3 cupfuls of batter onto the skillet, and cook until bubbles appear on the surface. Flip with a spatula, and cook until browned on the other side.
Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Saute onions until translucent. Pour in eggs. Cook, stirring occasionally to scramble. When eggs appear almost done, stir in chopped tomatoes and feta cheese, and season with salt and pepper. Cook until cheese is melted.
Combine eggs, milk and cinnamon; beat well. Dip bread into egg mixture until completely coated. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Cook bread slices until they are golden brown on both sides. Serve hot.
Whisk the flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, ginger, and cinnamon in a bowl; set aside. Beat the egg in a separate mixing bowl with the vanilla and molasses until smooth. Whisk in the water until completely incorporated. Stir the flour mixture into the molasses mixture until just combined -- a few lumps are okay. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Put butter in a 9-inch pie pan. Place pan in the preheating oven until butter is melted, 5 to 10 minutes. Whisk flour, milk, eggs, white sugar, and salt together in a bowl; pour mixture into the hot butter. Bake in the preheated oven until pancake is brown on the edges and a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, 20 to 24 minutes. Squeeze lemon over pancake and sprinkle with confectioners' sugar.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until almost crisp, 5 to 7 minutes. Remove from heat and transfer bacon to a dish, leaving drippings in the skillet.
                                    Watch Now Whisk 1/4 cup water, cream, lemon juice, and Worcestershire sauce together in a bowl.
                                    Watch Now Stir 4 cups water, butter, and 1 teaspoon salt together in a pot; bring to a boil. Whisk grits into pot, bring to a simmer, reduce heat to low, and cook until grits are creamy, 20 to 25 minutes. Remove from heat and stir white Cheddar cheese into grits.
                                    Watch Now Place shrimp in a large bowl and season with Cajun seasoning, 1/2 teaspoon salt, black pepper, and a pinch of cayenne pepper.
                                    Watch Now Heat skillet with bacon drippings over high heat. Cook shrimp in hot bacon fat in a single layer for 1 minute. Turn shrimp and add jalapeno; cook until fragrant, about 30 seconds. Stir cream mixture, bacon, green onion, and garlic to shrimp mixture; cook and stir, adding water as necessary to thin the sauce, until shrimp are cooked through, 3 to 4 minutes. Remove from heat and stir in parsley.
                                    Watch Now Ladle grits into a bowl and top with shrimp and sauce.
                                    Watch Now
Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-low heat. In a bowl, mix the flour, oats, baking powder, baking soda, and cinnamon. In a separate bowl, mix applesauce, sour cream, egg, and vanilla. Stir applesauce mixture and milk into the flour mixture until evenly moist and thick. Scoop about 1/4 cup batter for each pancake onto the prepared griddle, and cook, turning once, until golden brown on both sides.
In a large skillet, melt butter over medium high heat. Crack eggs in pan and cook to desired firmness. Just before eggs are cooked, place a slice of cheese over each egg. After cheese has melted, place each egg on a toasted slice of bread. Season eggs with salt and pepper. Spread mayonnaise and ketchup on remaining slices of bread and cover eggs with bread to make 4 sandwiches. Serve warm.
Grease a 9 x 5 inch loaf pan.  Preheat oven to 350 degrees (175 degrees C). Combine oil, honey, eggs, vanilla, and mashed bananas in a bowl. In a large bowl, whisk together flour, wheat germ, salt, and baking soda.  Make a well in dry ingredients, and add the banana mixture.  Mix together until dry ingredients are moistened.  Stir in nuts. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake 1 hour in preheated oven.  Test for doneness, and cool on wire rack.
In a medium bowl, mix together potatoes, beaten egg, salt, and cheese. Melt butter on a large griddle at medium heat. Drop potato mixture onto griddle 1/4 cup at a time. Flatten with a spatula to 1/2 inch thick. Fry approximately 5 minutes on each side, until golden brown. Serve hot.
In a large bowl, beat eggs with a wire whisk. Mix in milk, flour, sugar, salt, and melted butter. Preheat a non-stick electric skillet to medium heat. Pour a thin layer of batter on skillet, and spread to edges. Cook until top surface appears dry. Cut into 2 or 4 sections, and flip with a spatula. Cook for another 2 minutes, or until golden brown. Roll each pancake up, and serve.
Heat the olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Stir in the onion, bell peppers, and garlic; cook and stir until the vegetables have softened and the onion has turned translucent, about 5 minutes. Combine the tomatoes, cumin, paprika, salt, and chile pepper into a bowl and mix briefly. Pour the tomato mixture into the skillet, and stir to combine. Simmer, uncovered, until the tomato juices have cooked off, about 10 minutes. Make four indentations in the tomato mixture for the eggs. Crack the eggs into the indentations. Cover the skillet and let the eggs cook until they're firm but not dry, about 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Stir Cheddar cheese, eggs, bacon, bread, red bell pepper, green onion, milk, garlic, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl until well-combined; pour into prepared baking dish.
                                    Watch Now Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set, 20 to 25 minutes.
                                    Watch Now
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). In a small bowl, mix together white sugar and cinnamon; set aside. Place butter in a 9 inch cake pan and heat in the oven until melted. In a blender or food processor, whip eggs and milk. Pour in flour and beat until well combined. Pour batter into hot pan. Sprinkle on sugar and cinnamon. Bake in preheated oven for 20 to 25 minutes, or until puffed and golden. Dust with confectioners' sugar; serve warm.
Combine pumpkin, milk, sugar, cinnamon, and vanilla in a large saucepan over medium heat. Use a whisk to blend well. Heat to a simmer; do not boil.
Separate the egg whites from the egg yolks. Place the egg yolks into a bowl and mash with a fork. Chop the egg whites into small pieces and set aside. Melt the butter in a saucepan set over medium heat. Stir in flour until smooth. Gradually mix in the milk and chicken bouillon so that no lumps form and stir constantly until the mixture comes to a boil. Add the egg yolks and mix until dissolved. Stir in egg whites. Serve over toast and season with salt and white pepper.
In a large frying pan or skillet, heat olive oil over medium-high heat. Sprinkle potatoes lightly with salt and pepper. Cook until golden brown and crisp. Once the potatoes are golden, stir in the onions. Cook, stirring occasionally, until onions soften and begin to brown. Meanwhile, beat eggs together with salt and pepper. Pour eggs into pan and stir gently to combine. Reduce heat to low and cook until eggs begin to brown on the bottom. Loosen bottom of omelet with a spatula, invert a large plate over the pan, and carefully turn the omelet out onto it. Slide the omelet back into the pan with the uncooked side down. Cook until eggs are set. Garnish omelet with tomato and green onion and serve warm.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease bottoms of two 9-inch loaf pans. Mix together flour, salt, baking powder, poppy seeds, butter flavoring, oil, eggs, milk, sugar, vanilla, and almond flavoring. Pour into prepared pans. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for one hour. Cool 5 minutes. Poke holes in top of loaves and pour glaze over. To make glaze: Mix orange juice, 1/2 teaspoon butter flavoring, 1/2 teaspoon almond flavoring, and 1 teaspoon vanilla. Add enough confectioners' sugar to make glaze.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease and flour three 7 x 3 inch loaf pans. Mix oil, sugar, and eggs together in a large bowl.  Mix in pumpkin puree and water.  Stir together flour, soda, baking powder, salt, and spices.  Add to the pumpkin mixture, and mix until just combined.  Stir in nuts and raisins.  Divide batter into prepared pans. Bake for 1 hour.  Cool on wire racks.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Spray a 9 inch pie plate with non-stick cooking spray. In a large bowl, beat together baking mix, 3/4 cup cheddar cheese, milk, maple syrup, sugar and eggs until only small lumps of cheese remain. Pour into prepared pie plate. Bake in preheated oven for 10 to 15 minutes, until a toothpick inserted into center of pancake comes out clean. Sprinkle bacon and remaining 1/2 cup cheese over top of pancake. Bake until cheese melts, about 3 to 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. In a large bowl, mix the eggs, flour, baking powder, and salt. Stir in the green chile peppers, cottage cheese, Cheddar cheese, and melted butter. Pour into the prepared baking dish. Bake 15 minutes in the preheated oven. Reduce heat to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C), and continue baking for 35 to 40 minutes. Cool slightly, and cut into small squares.
Whisk almond flour, water, eggs, maple syrup, and salt together in a bowl until batter is smooth. Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat; drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side, 3 to 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat an oven to 100 degrees F ( 40 degrees C). Heat mashed strawberries and 1/2 cup white sugar in a saucepan over medium heat. Mix cornstarch and water together in a bowl, then stir into the strawberries. Cook and stir until thickened, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to low and simmer while preparing remaining ingredients, stirring occasionally. Whisk together the milk and eggs in a bowl; set aside. Mash cream cheese, vanilla extract, and 3/4 cup white sugar in a bowl until smooth. Spread the cream cheese mixture over a triangle-shaped piece of bread, and top with another piece. Repeat with remaining bread and cream cheese mixture to make 8 triangle-shaped sandwiches. Heat butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Dip the sandwiches into the egg mixture, 2 or 3 at a time, and place in the skillet. Cook until golden brown on both sides, about 3 minutes per side. Transfer pan-fried sandwiches to a baking sheet and place in the preheated oven to keep warm while cooking remaining sandwiches. To serve, top French toast with warm strawberry glaze and sliced fresh strawberries and sprinkle with confectioners' sugar. Serve with a dollop of whipped cream.
Place the banana, kale, soy milk, flax seeds, and maple syrup into a blender. Cover, and puree until smooth. Serve over ice.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees. In a large bowl, whisk together all ingredients until well mixed.  Spray a 9-inch pie plate with cooking spray and fill with the spinach mixture. Bake for 30 minutes, or until browned and set. Let cool for 20 minutes, cut in wedges and serve.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. In a large bowl, whip together eggs, cream, nutmeg, salt, and pepper. Stir in bacon, spinach, mushrooms, onions, 3/4 cup Swiss cheese, and 3/4 cup Cheddar cheese. Transfer to the pie crust. Top with remaining cheese. Bake uncovered in the preheated oven 35 minutes, or until bubbly and lightly browned.
Just before going to bed, combine the oats and water in a slow cooker. Set on Low, cover, and let cook overnight. In the morning, stir in the salt and half-and-half. Scoop into bowls, and sprinkle brown sugar over the top.
Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble, and set aside. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 7x11 inch baking dish. In a bowl, mix cooked sausage, broccoli, and 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese. In a separate bowl, mix 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese, ricotta cheese, eggs, milk, pepper, and salt. Spoon the sausage mixture into the prepared baking dish. Spread the Cheddar and ricotta mixture over the sausage mixture. Sprinkle with remaining Cheddar. Arrange tomato slices on top. Cover with aluminum foil, and bake 30 minutes in the preheated oven. Uncover, and bake for an additional 15 minutes. Let stand for 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat waffle iron. In a large mixing bowl, stir together flour, baking powder, salt, sugar and cocoa. Stir in milk, eggs and butter until mixture is smooth. To make hard sauce: stir together softened butter, confectioners' sugar, vanilla extract and milk. Sauce should be fairly stiff. Spray preheated waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray. Pour mix onto hot waffle iron. Cook until golden brown. Serve hot with hard sauce.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a 9x13 inch baking pan with the melted butter. Place eggs, milk and flour in a blender and whip until smooth. Pour into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven for 20 minutes, or until golden. In a small saucepan, combine sugar, buttermilk, butter, corn syrup, baking soda; boil for 7 minutes. Remove from heat and stir in vanilla. Spoon over slices of pancake.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease an 8x11-inch baking dish. Cook and stir breakfast sausage in a skillet over medium heat until browned and crumbly, about 10 minutes; drain excess grease. Mix green onion into sausage and spread mixture over bottom of the prepared baking dish. Spread hash brown potatoes in a layer over sausage; top with Cheddar cheese. Whisk eggs, milk, and gravy mix together in a bowl until smooth; pour over casserole. Season with paprika. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center of the casserole comes out clean, about 1 hour. Let stand 10 minutes to firm up before serving.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Whisk eggs, milk, vanilla extract, cinnamon, allspice, and salt together in a large bowl. Place bread slices in egg mixture and soak, turning to coat, until bread is completely saturated. Melt butter in a cast-iron skillet over medium heat. Working in batches, cook bread in hot butter until golden, about 3 minutes per side. Transfer toasted bread to a baking sheet. Bake toast in the oven until outside is crisp and slightly puffed, 12 to 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Prepare the mushrooms by snipping off the stems.  Cut in half if large. Crumble the sausage in a large skillet, add the mushrooms, cook on medium-high heat until the meat and mushrooms are lightly browned and all the liquid from the mushrooms has evaporated.  Drain off the grease.  Add the parsley. In a large bowl, beat the eggs, adding the cream, cheese and salt.  Pour into the mushroom/sausage mixture; blending well. Pour mixture into the pie shell. Bake in preheated oven for 25 to 30 minutes, until crust is well browned and the filling is set. Let stand 10 minutes before serving.
Place the eggs, sugar, flour and milk into the container of a blender. Process until smooth on low speed. Heat a large skillet or griddle over medium heat. Pour batter about 1/4 cup at a time (or more for larger pancakes). Tilt pan to achieve a round shape. Heat until golden, then flip and brown on the other side. Serve immediately with syrup, or fresh berries and whipped cream.
Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil.  Add potatoes and cook until tender but still firm, about 5 minutes. Drain and set aside to cool. Meanwhile, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a cast iron skillet, heat oil over medium heat. Add onions and cook slowly, stirring occasionally, until onions are soft. Stir in eggs, drained potatoes, ham, salt and pepper. Cook until eggs are firm on the bottom, about 5 minutes. Top frittata with shredded cheese and place in preheated oven until cheese is melted and eggs are completely firm, about 10 minutes.
Preheat waffle iron. In a large mixing bowl, sift together flour, baking powder, salt and nutmeg. Stir in milk and eggs until mixture is smooth.
                                    Watch Now Spray preheated waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray. Pour two tablespoons of the waffle batter onto the hot waffle iron. Place two slices of banana on top of the batter and then spoon another two tablespoons of batter on top of the banana. Cook until golden brown. Serve hot.
                                    Watch Now
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Place the onion and olive oil into a 9 inch deep-dish pie plate. Bake for about 15 minutes, or until onion is tender. Place the lentils and water into a saucepan, and bring to a boil. Cook for about 20 minutes, or until lentils are tender. Drain most of the water off, then place the broccoli florets on top of the lentils. Cover and cook for about 5 minutes. This will dry the lentils, and cook the broccoli. Transfer the lentils, broccoli and tomatoes to the pie plate with the onions, and stir to evenly distribute each item. Stir in cheese at this time if using. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, salt, pepper, and Italian seasoning. Pour over the ingredients in the pie plate. Bake for 45 minutes in the preheated oven, or until the center is firm when the quiche is jiggled. Cool for a few minutes before slicing and serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a large baking dish. Bring water to a boil in a large saucepan, and stir in grits. Reduce heat, cover, and simmer about 5 minutes, until liquid has been absorbed. Mix in 1/2 the butter and 2 cups cheese until melted. In a skillet over medium-high heat, cook the sausage until evenly browned. Drain, and mix into the grits. Beat together the eggs and milk in a bowl, and pour into the skillet. Lightly scramble, then mix into the grits. Pour the grits mixture into the prepared baking dish. Dot with remaining butter, and top with remaining cheese. Season with salt and pepper. Bake 30 minutes in the preheated oven, until lightly browned.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C).
                                    Watch Now In a large bowl, whisk together eggs and half-and-half. Season with salt, white pepper and nutmeg. Place shredded Jarlsberg and mozzarella in the pie shell. Pour egg mixture over cheese.
                                    Watch Now Bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes. Reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C), and bake for 25 minutes, or until crust is golden and filling is set. Allow to set 5 to 10 minutes before serving.
                                    Watch Now
Lightly grease a 4 quart or larger slow cooker. Place 1/3 of the hash brown potatoes in a layer on the bottom. Layer 1/3 of the ham, onion, green pepper, and Cheddar cheese. Repeat layers two more times. In a large bowl, whisk together eggs and milk, and season with salt and pepper. Pour over the contents of the slow cooker. Cover, and cook on Low for 10 to 12 hours.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease 2 mini muffin pans. In a large skillet over medium heat, fry bacon and onion together for about 5 minutes, or until bacon is crisp. Drain and set aside. In a medium bowl, beat the eggs. Stir in the baking mix, parsley, shredded cheese, bacon and onion. Spoon into greased muffin cups. Bake for 10 to 15 minutes in the preheated oven, or until the tops are lightly browned. Allow mini quiches to cool in the pan before carefully removing with a small knife or spatula.
In a medium size mixing bowl combine mashed potatoes, egg, flour, salt (if needed) and garlic salt. Mix well. Melt butter in a large frying pan over a low heat. Drop pancake-size (4 inch circles) lumps of mashed potatoes into the frying pan. Pat to flatten to 1/2 to 1 inch thickness. Sprinkle some cheddar cheese onto the mashed potato cake. Spoon more potato mixture over the cheese. Flip the potato cake over when the bottom is browned (about 10 minutes). Brown the other side (about 10 minutes).
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease three 7 1/2 x 3 1/2-inch loaf pans. In a large mixing bowl combine the flour, soda, salt, baking powder, sugar, cinnamon, and pumpkin pie spice. Stir well. Add applesauce, eggs, pumpkin, and water. Mix batter until well combined. Stir in nuts. Pour batter into prepared pans. Bake until tester inserted in the center of each loaf comes out clean, 50 to 60 minutes.
Whisk flour, cornmeal, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a large bowl.  Whisk buttermilk, eggs and butter in a separate large bowl.  Stir the liquid mixture into the dry mixture until blended and smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or skillet over medium-high heat.  For each pancake, pour 1/4 cup batter on griddle and cook until browned, about 1 1/2 minutes.  Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 1 minute.  Continue with remaining batter.
In a blender, combine bananas, frozen strawberries, yogurt and milk. Blend until smooth. Pour into glasses and serve.
In a blender, blend the kiwi, banana, blueberries, strawberries, ice, orange juice, and yogurt until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a blender, combine tofu and milk; process until smooth, adding more milk if necessary. Blend in salt and pepper. In a medium bowl, combine spinach, garlic, onion, Cheddar cheese, Swiss cheese and tofu mixture. Mix well, and pour into prepared pie crust. Bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes, or until set and golden brown on top. Let stand 5 minutes before cutting.
Combine milk, oats, Greek yogurt, chia seeds, honey, and cinnamon in a 1/2-pint jar with a lid; cover and shake until combined. Remove lid and fold in blueberries. Cover jar with lid. Refrigerate oatmeal, 8 hours to overnight.
Beat eggs, milk, and salt together in a bowl. Heat a small nonstick skillet over medium heat. Cook eggs in hot skillet without stirring until set on the bottom, about 1 1/2 minutes. Flip eggs and cook without stirring until set on the other side, about 1 minute more. Remove from heat. Spread 1 tablespoon of mayonnaise on each piece of toast. Spread mustard over mayonnaise onto each piece of toast. Place eggs on one piece of toast and top with remaining toast.
Whisk whole wheat flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a bowl. Whisk buttermilk, eggs, and vegetable oil in a separate bowl; pour buttermilk mixture into dry ingredients. Stir just until combined (batter may seem a bit thick). Heat a cast iron skillet over medium-low heat for 5 minutes. Pour 1/3 cup of batter onto hot skillet and use a spoon to spread the pancake a bit. Cook until browned and bubbles appear on top, 1 1/2 to 2 minutes. Flip and cook until browned and set in the middle, about 2 more minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a half-casserole baking dish or deep-dish pie plate. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease.
                                    Watch Now Stir hash browns, cooked sausage, Cheddar cheese, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and black pepper together in a large bowl. Whisk milk, eggs, and remaining salt together in another bowl. Pour hash brown mixture into prepared baking dish; pour egg mixture evenly over hash brown mixture.
                                    Watch Now Bake in the preheated oven until bubbling and golden, about 45 minutes.
                                    Watch Now
Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Line the bottom of the dish with half the bread cubes. Sprinkle with ham, Cheddar cheese, and Swiss cheese, and top with remaining bread. In a bowl, beat together the eggs, milk, and onion powder. Pour evenly over bread. Cover, and refrigerate overnight. Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). In a small bowl, blend the crushed cornflakes and melted butter. Spread evenly over the casserole. Bake 40 minutes in the preheated oven, or until bubbly and golden brown. Let stand 5 minutes before serving.
Combine the water, apple juice, and apples in a saucepan. Bring to a boil over high heat, and stir in the rolled oats and cinnamon. Return to a boil, then reduce heat to low, and simmer until thick, about 3 minutes. Spoon into serving bowls, and pour milk over the servings.
                                    Watch Now
In a large mixing bowl combine oats, wheat germ, wheat bran, oat bran, dried fruit, nuts, sugar, and seeds. Mix well. Store muesli in an airtight container. It keeps for 2 months at room temperature.
Warm the milk and water in a small saucepan until very warm (125 degrees F/50 degrees C). Lightly grease two 8x4 inch loaf pans; sprinkle cornmeal inside pans. In a large bowl, mix together 3 cups flour, yeast, sugar, salt and soda. Stir milk into the flour mixture; beat well. Stir in the remaining flour, 1 cup at a time, until a stiff batter is formed. Spoon batter into prepared pans. Cover and let rise in a warm place for until nearly doubled in size, about 45 minutes. Meanwhile, preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Bake in preheated oven until golden brown, about 25 minutes. Remove from pans immediately and cool.
Combine the oats, apple, cranberries, almonds, pecans, water, milk, cinnamon, pumpkin pie spice, and butter in a slow cooker. Cook on Low overnight or 8 hours.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Crack the eggs into a bowl, being careful to keep the yolks intact. Arrange avocado halves in a baking dish, resting them along the edge so avocado won't tip over. Gently spoon 1 egg yolk into the avocado hole. Continue spooning egg white into the hole until full. Repeat with remaining egg yolk, egg white, and avocado. Season each filled avocado with chives, parsley, sea salt, and pepper. Gently place baking dish in the preheated oven and bake until eggs are cooked, about 15 minutes. Sprinkle bacon over avocado.
In a medium-size mixing bowl, whisk together the flour, milk, egg and salt. Heat a large frying pan or wok over medium high heat. When the pan is hot add a teaspoon of butter and lightly coat the surface of the pan with the melted butter. Pour one quarter cup of the batter into the pan and tilt the pan with a circular motion so that the batter coats the surface in a smooth and even layer. After two minutes, lift up an edge of the crepe with a spatula to see if it is browning. When the underside has begun to brown, flip the crepe and cook the other side until it is also brown; about 2 minutes. Repeat steps 3 and 4 to cook the remaining crepes. Serve hot.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Heat oil in a 12 inch skillet over medium-high heat. When the skillet is hot, add the potatoes, and fry until crispy and golden, about 15 minutes. Reduce heat to medium, and add onions. Cook, stirring, until softened. Season with salt and pepper. Pour eggs over the potatoes and onions. Place the skillet in the oven for about 10 minutes, or until eggs are firm. Remove from the oven, and sprinkle shredded cheese over the top. Return to the oven for about 5 minutes, or until cheese is melted.
Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). In a large bowl, use an electric mixer to blend eggs, milk and vanilla. Add flour, sugar, salt and cinnamon; mix just until blended. Set aside. Melt butter in a 9x9 inch square pan. Arrange apple slices in the bottom of the pan, and pour the batter over them. Sprinkle brown sugar over the top. Bake for 20 minutes in the preheated oven, or until puffed and lightly browned.
Preheat a waffle iron. Beat together eggs and sugar with an electric mixer until fluffy.  Pour in shortening, milk, salt, and vanilla; mix until well blended.  Sift together the flour and baking powder.  Mix the flour into the liquid. Spoon 2/3 cup of batter onto the preheated waffle iron at a time. Close the iron and cook until steam no is no longer coming out and waffle is browned.
Preheat the oven to 250 degrees F (120 degrees C). Lightly grease a cookie sheet with sides, or a large cake pan with cooking spray. In a large bowl, toss together the oats, almonds, wheat germ, coconut, and sunflower seeds. In a separate bowl, whisk together the maple syrup, brown sugar, oil, water and salt. Pour the liquid over the oat and nut mixture, and stir until evenly coated. Spread out on the prepared cookie sheet. If you want some chunky bits, squeeze some small handfuls into little clumps. Bake for 1 hour and 15 minutes in the preheated oven, stirring occasionally until evenly toasted. Mix in raisins. Cool, and store in an airtight container at room temperature.
In a blender, combine strawberries, orange juice, ice cubes and sugar. Blend until smooth. Pour into glasses and serve.
Spread 4 slices oatnut bread on one side with cream cheese. Spread remaining 4 slices on one side with raspberry jam. Press cream cheese slices together with jam slices, forming sandwiches. In a medium, shallow bowl, beat together the eggs, milk and almond extract. Melt butter in a large, heavy skillet over medium high heat. Dip sandwiches in the egg mixture to coat. Place in the skillet, and cook on both sides until golden brown.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Lightly grease a 9 inch deep dish pie plate. Whisk together eggs and oil in a bowl with salt and pepper.  Stir in baking powder and baking mix until moistened.  Gently fold in zucchini, summer squash, and onion.  Pour into prepared pie plate, and arrange sliced tomato over top.  Sprinkle with Parmesan cheese to taste. Bake in preheated oven until puffed and golden brown, about 35 minutes.
Coat a 9x13-inch baking dish with melted butter. Spread any remaining melted butter over bottom of dish. Sprinkle brown sugar and cinnamon evenly over melted butter. Arrange bread in two layers over brown sugar mixture. Beat eggs, milk, and salt in a bowl; pour over bread. Cover and refrigerate overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, about 30 minutes.
Melt butter with the olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat, and cook the onion just until it begins to brown, about 8 minutes; stir in the potatoes and carrot, and cook until tender, about 15 minutes, stirring occasionally. Stir in the cubed corned beef, parsley, thyme, salt, and pepper. Let the mixture cook until hash is crisp and browned, stirring often, 10 to 15 more minutes.
Cut banana into small pieces and place into the bowl of a blender.  Add the soy milk, yogurt, flax seed meal, and honey.  Blend on lowest speed until smooth, about 5 seconds.  Gradually add the blueberries while continuing to blend on low.  Once the blueberries have been incorporated, increase speed, and blend to desired consistency.
Preheat the oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). In a large bowl, mix together the oats, wheat germ, flax seed meal, brown sugar, sunflower seeds, pecans, almonds, cinnamon and salt. In a separate bowl, whisk together the oil, honey, vanilla and water. Pour the wet ingredients over the dry, and mix until evenly blended. Spread in a greased 9x13 or 11x7 inch baking pan. Bake for 1 hour in the preheated oven, stirring every 20 minutes, or until toasted. Let cool completely before storing in an airtight container.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease and flour a 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, stir together flour, baking soda, cinnamon, nutmeg and white sugar. Stir in eggs, applesauce, bananas and vanilla extract. Fold in raisins and nuts if desired. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven for 45 to 60 minutes, until a knife inserted into center of the loaf comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). In a hot skillet, melt the butter. Stir in rosemary, salt and pepper. Coat potatoes evenly with the melted butter. Arrange the potatoes in a single layer on a baking pan. Bake in a preheated oven until potatoes are golden brown, approximately 20 to 25 minutes. Toss them occasionally to ensure that they brown on all sides.
Melt the butter in a skillet over medium heat, and cook and stir the mushrooms until their liquid has mostly evaporated and the mushrooms are beginning to brown, about 10 minutes. Set the mushrooms aside. Grease a 9x13 inch baking dish, and arrange 8 muffin halves, cut sides up, in the bottom of the dish. Stuff pieces of remaining muffins into the spaces between the halves. Spread 1 cup of Colby-Monterey Jack cheese over the muffins in a layer, and distribute the asparagus pieces, mushrooms, red pepper, and onion over the cheese. Whisk together eggs, milk, salt, dry mustard, and black pepper in a bowl, and pour the egg mixture over the muffins and vegetables. Cover the dish, and refrigerate overnight. The next day,  preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Remove the casserole from the refrigerator and let stand for 30 minutes. Spread 1 cup of Colby-Monterey Jack cheese in a layer over the casserole. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted near the edge comes out clean, 40 to 45 minutes. Let stand 5 to 10 minutes before cutting into squares.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Beat egg whites and cream of tartar together in a bowl until stiff peaks form. Mix egg yolks, cream cheese, and sugar together in a separate bowl using a wooden spoon and then mixing with a hand-held egg beater until mixture is very smooth and has no visible cream cheese. Gently fold egg whites into cream cheese mixture, taking care not to deflate the egg whites. Carefully scoop mixture onto the prepared baking sheet, forming 5 to 6 "buns". Bake in the preheated oven until cloud bread is lightly browned, about 30 minutes.
Preheat griddle over medium heat. Stir together the flour, baking powder, nutmeg, cinnamon and sugar, set aside. In a medium bowl, stir together the egg, yogurt, milk and oil. Gradually stir in the flour mixture, then fold in the blueberries. Pour batter onto hot greased griddle, two tablespoons at a time. Cook over medium heat until bubbles pop and stay open, then turn over and cook on the other side until golden.
Whisk together flour, salt, and baking powder. In a large bowl, cream shortening, 1 cup sugar, and eggs together until light and fluffy.  Add milk alternately with flour mixture in two parts; mix well.  Stir in grated lemon rind and nuts.  Pour batter into greased and floured 9 x 5 inch loaf pan. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 60 minutes.  Allow bread to cool in the pan for 5 minutes. Mix together 1/2 cup sugar and the juice of one lemon to make a glaze.  Remove bread from pan.  Pour glaze over warm bread.
Melt butter in an 8x8 inch glass baking dish or small casserole dish. Add croutons and toss to coat. Sprinkle cheese on top of croutons. In a large bowl, beat together eggs, milk and dry mustard. Pour egg mixture over croutons and cheese. Sprinkle on cubed ham. Cover with plastic wrap, and refrigerate overnight. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Let casserole stand at room temperature while oven heats. Bake in preheated oven for 40 minutes, until eggs are set. Let sit for 5 minutes before cutting.  Can also be frozen and microwaved later.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Generously grease the bottom of a 9 x 5 inch loaf pan. Measure oil, bananas, vanilla, eggs, baking mix, sugar, and nuts into a large bowl.  Beat vigorously with a spoon for about 30 seconds.  Pour the batter into the prepared pan. Bake until a wooden pick inserted in center comes out clean, about 55 to 65 minutes.  Cool for 5 minutes in the pan.  Loosen sides of loaf from the pan.  Remove to a wire rack to cool completely.
Mix together oats and milk in a microwave-safe bowl. Cook on high for 1 to 2 minutes, stirring once. Add more milk or oats to achieve the desired consistency, and cook for another 30 seconds. Stir in pumpkin puree, pumpkin pie spice, and cinnamon sugar. Heat through, and serve.
Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). In a large bowl, stir together the oats, almonds, walnuts, pecans, sesame seeds, wheat germ, coconut and sunflower seeds. In a small pan over medium heat, stir together the oil and honey. Cook and stir until blended. You could also do this in a large measuring cup in the microwave, heating for about 2 minutes and 30 seconds. Pour over the oat mixture, and stir to coat evenly. Spread out in an even layer on two cookie sheets. Bake for 20 minutes in the preheated oven, until the oats and nuts are toasted. Immediately after it comes out of the oven, stir in the raisins and dried cranberries. Let stand until cooled, and stir again to break up any large clusters. Store in an airtight container at room temperature for up to two weeks, but I guarantee it won't be around that long!
Combine pumpkin, oil and eggs. Sift together dry ingredients. Combine the two mixtures, blending  thoroughly. Pour into 2 greased 9 x 5 x 3 inch loaf pans and bake at 300 degrees F (150 degrees C) for 1 hour.
Place water, milk, shortening, salt, flour, sugar and yeast in the pan of the bread machine in the order recommended by the manufacturer. Select cycle; press Start. If your machine has a Fruit setting, add the raisins at the signal, or about 5 minutes before the kneading cycle has finished. Take dough out after first kneading cycle has finished. Turn dough out onto a lightly floured surface and roll out into a rectangle. Spread dough with butter, brown sugar, and cinnamon. Roll dough, and divide into two parts. Place loaves in two lightly greased 9x5 inch bread pans. Cover and let rise in a warm place until doubled in size, about 1 hour. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Brush tops of risen loaves with melted butter and bake in preheated oven for 30 to 40 minutes, until crust is brown and loaves sound hollow when tapped.
In a large bowl, stir together  potatoes, eggs, onion, flour, salt and pepper. In a large skillet, heat oil over medium high heat. Drop large spoonfuls of the potato batter into the skillet and flatten cakes slightly with a spatula. Cook for about 4 minutes on each side, until golden brown. Serve immediately.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour 2 - 8x4 inch loaf pans. In a large bowl, mix together the cake mix, eggs, oil, pudding mix, water, and poppy seeds.  Spread batter into two greased 8x4 inch loaf pans. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 25 minutes or until a toothpick inserted into the cake comes out clean.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease three 6x3 inch loaf pans. In a small bowl, stir together the persimmon pulp and baking soda. Let stand 5 minutes to thicken the pulp. In a medium bowl, combine sugar, oil, eggs, cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt. Blend until smooth. Mix in persimmon pulp and water alternately with flour. Fold in nuts. Divide batter into the prepared pans, filling each pan 2/3 full. Bake for 1 hour in the preheated oven, or until a toothpick inserted comes out clean. Cool in pan for 10 minutes before removing to a wire rack to cool completely.
Combine flour, sugar and salt in a bowl. Make a well in the center of the flour and add the milk and egg. Beat well to combine. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each crepe. Tilt the pan with a circular motion so that the batter coats the surface evenly. Cook the crepe for about 2 minutes, until the bottom is light brown. Loosen with a spatula, turn and cook the other side. Serve hot.
In a large bowl, stir together the coffee creamer, hot chocolate mix, instant coffee, sugar, nutmeg and cinnamon. Store in an airtight container at room temperature. To make 1 cup, spoon 2 heaping tablespoons of the mix into a coffee mug, and add 1 cup of boiling water. Stir until dissolved.
In a blender, combine banana, chocolate syrup, milk and crushed ice. Blend until smooth. Pour into glasses and serve.
Melt the butter or margarine in a large skillet over medium heat. Add the potatoes and spread out in an even layer. Cover and cook for about 5 minutes. Season with garlic, paprika, salt and pepper; stir to coat potatoes evenly. Cover and cook for another 15 minutes, turning potatoes occasionally. Remove cover, and mix in chives. Increase heat to medium-high and cook for another 10 minutes, stirring frequently, or until potatoes are tender.
In a blender, combine bananas and milk. Pulse until bananas are chopped. Pour in water and brown sugar. Blend until smooth. Toss in the ice cubes and blend until smooth. Pour into 4 glasses and serve immediately.
In a medium bowl, mix together the blue cornmeal, salt and sugar. Stir in the boiling water until all of the ingredients are wet. Cover, and let stand for a few minutes. In a measuring cup, combine the milk, egg and melted butter. Stir the milk mixture into the cornmeal mixture. Combine the flour and baking powder; stir into the cornmeal mixture until just incorporated. If the batter is stiff, add a little more milk until it flows off the spoon thickly but smoothly. Heat a large cast iron skillet over medium heat, and grease it with a dab of oil or butter.  Use about 2 tablespoons of batter for each pancake. Quickly sprinkle a few pignoli onto each cake. When the entire surface of the pancakes are covered with bubbles, flip them over, and cook the other side until golden. It's hard to tell when blue food is cooked through--so give them a few extra seconds if you're in doubt. Serve immediately with maple syrup of fruit preserves.
Toss cubed bread with bacon, cheese, and mushrooms, and pour into a 9x13 inch baking dish. Whisk together eggs, half-and-half, and mustard until smooth, then pour evenly over cubed bread. Cover dish with plastic wrap, and refrigerate overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove plastic wrap from the baking dish, and bake strata in preheated oven until the top is golden brown, and the eggs are set, about 1 hour. Let stand for 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). In a very large bowl, mix together the sugar, peanut butter, butter, water, vanilla and eggs until smooth. Combine the flour, baking soda and salt; stir into the batter. Mix in the oats and raisins, then carefully stir in the cereal. Drop 1/2 cupfuls of dough onto ungreased cookie sheets, spacing cookies about 4 inches apart. Flatten cookies to 1 inch thick. Bake for 12 minutes in the preheated oven, until cookies are lightly browned at the edges. Let stand on the cookie sheets for 5 minutes before removing to wire racks to cool completely. Store at room temperature. I like to put each cookie into a sandwich bag which makes them easy to grab on the way out the door.
Heat oil in a small skillet over medium-high heat. Fry tortillas one at a time until firm, but not crisp. Remove to paper towels to drain grease. Meanwhile, combine the refried beans and butter in a microwave-safe dish. Cover, and cook in the microwave until heated through. When tortillas are done, fry eggs over easy in the skillet. Add more oil if the tortillas have absorbed it all. Place tortillas onto plates, and spread a layer of beans on them. Top with cheese,  a fried egg, crumbled bacon and if desired, salsa.
In a bowl, whisk milk, vanilla, sugar, and cinnamon into the beaten eggs until well blended. Set aside. In a separate bowl, cream together raspberry puree and cream cheese until smooth. Make 'sandwiches' by cutting each slice of bread in half and spreading raspberry-cheese mixture in the center, then top with the other half. Melt butter over medium heat in a large skillet or griddle. Dip bread into egg mixture, coating thoroughly. Cook until well-browned on both sides, about 5 minutes. Dust with confectioners' sugar and nutmeg. Serve immediately.
In a bowl, combine the flour, salt and sugar. Gradually pour in the milk, stirring constantly, until a smooth batter is formed. Add the eggs, one at time, stirring well each addition. Stir in sliced bananas. Heat oil and butter in a nine inch non-stick skillet over medium heat. Pour the mixture in by spoonfuls, spreading the mixture evenly across the pan. When the bottom has turned a golden brown, turn the frittata and cook over low heat until golden brown on the other side. Sprinkle with sugar and serve warm.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease 12 muffin tins. Trim or cut bread into circles. Place circles in bottom of muffin tins. Distribute the onion and shredded cheese evenly between the muffin tins. In a medium bowl, combine milk, eggs, mustard and pepper. Divide between the muffin tins. Bake in preheated oven for 20 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted into the center of a quiche comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Lightly grease and flour two 8x4 inch pans. In a large bowl, cream together the sugar and butter until light and fluffy. Stir in the eggs one at a time, beating well with each addition. Stir in the banana and sour cream. In a separate bowl, combine the flour, baking soda, baking powder, cinnamon and pecans; stir into banana mixture, just until combined. Pour batter into prepared pans. Bake in preheated oven for 55 to 65 minutes, until a toothpick inserted into center of a loaf comes out clean. Remove from pan and place on a wire rack to cool. Serve warm or cold.
Bring water to a boil in a heavy, large saucepan, and stir in the oats. Reduce heat to a simmer, and cook oats until they begin to thicken, about 10 minutes; mix in the apple, carrot, raisins, cinnamon, nutmeg, ginger, and salt. Let the oats simmer until tender, about 20 more minutes. While the oats are simmering, melt butter in a skillet over medium-low heat, and stir in the pecans. Toast the nuts until fragrant and lightly browned, 2 to 5 minutes, then sprinkle with brown sugar and stir until sugar has melted and coated the pecans. Serve in bowls, each topped with about 2 tablespoons of the pecan mixture and a dollop of yogurt.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Arrange hash brown patties on the prepared baking dish. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese and ham over patties. Beat eggs, milk, salt, and mustard in a large bowl using a whisk; pour over ham. Cover baking dish with aluminum foil. Bake in the preheated oven for 1 hour. Remove foil and bake until edges are golden brown and a knife inserted in the center comes out clean, about 15 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Mix brown sugar, rice vinegar, maple syrup, and black pepper in a small bowl. Place bacon slices on cooling rack set over a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven for 10 minutes, turn slices, and bake another 5 minutes. Remove bacon and brush both sides with brown sugar mixture. Return bacon to the oven and bake another 5 minutes. Repeat basting every 5 minutes until bacon is browned and crisp, about 35 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 7x11-inch baking dish. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels and crumble. Beat eggs, milk, butter, salt, and ground pepper in a bowl; pour into prepared baking dish. Sprinkle with onions, bacon, and Cheddar cheese. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted near the center comes out clean, 25 to 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a large bowl, combine ham, broccoli, onion, parsley, mustard and cheese. Stir well. Unroll crescent roll dough, and arrange flat on a medium baking sheet. Pinch together perforations to form a single sheet of dough. Using a knife or scissors, cut 1 inch wide strips in towards the center, starting on the long sides. There should be a solid strip about 3 inches wide down the center, with the cut strips forming a fringe down each side. Spread the filling along the center strip. Fold the side strips over filling, alternating strips from each side. Pinch or twist to seal. Bake in preheated oven for 20 to 25 minutes, until deep golden brown.
Cut bread into 1 1/2 inch thick slices and place in a lightly greased 9x13 inch baking pan. In a large bowl, beat eggs with 1 1/2 cup skim milk, 1/3 cup white sugar, and 1 tablespoon vanilla. Pour egg mixture over bread slices. Arrange apple slices on top of bread. Sprinkle cinnamon, nutmeg, and  2 tablespoons white sugar over apples. Cover, and refrigerate overnight. In the morning: Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake toast in preheated oven until golden brown, about 1 hour. Meanwhile, combine 1/2 cup white sugar, flour, and margarine. Stir in brown sugar, 1/2 cup skim milk, and 2 teaspoons vanilla in a small saucepan. Cook until thick. Serve French toast hot with warm sauce.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat oil in deep-fryer to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Place eggs in saucepan and cover with water. Bring to boil. Cover, remove from heat, and let eggs sit in hot water for 10 to 12 minutes. Remove from hot water, cool and peel. Flatten the sausage and make a patty to surround each egg. Very lightly flour the sausage and coat with beaten egg. Roll in bread crumbs to cover evenly. Deep fry until golden brown, or pan fry while making sure each side is well cooked. Bake in the preheated oven for 10 minutes. Cut in half and serve over a bed of lettuce and sliced tomatoes for garnish.  If mustard is desired it looks beautiful over this.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. In a large skillet or frying pan, heat oil over medium high heat. Add zucchini, mushrooms, onion, green pepper and garlic; saute until tender. Remove from heat and let cool slightly. In a large bowl, beat together the eggs and cream. Stir in cream cheese, cheddar cheese, bread cubes and sauteed vegetables. Season with salt and pepper. Mix well and pour into prepared baking dish. Bake in preheated oven for one hour, or until center is set. Serve hot or cold.
Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add potatoes, red bell pepper, garlic and onion, and cook, stirring occasionally until potatoes are tender. Cover the pan with a lid for faster cooking. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line the bottom of an 8 or 9 inch cake pan with parchment paper. Set aside. Fry bacon in a skillet over medium heat, or cook in the microwave, until crisp. Drain, crumble and set aside. Sprinkle the cheese in the bottom of the prepared pan. Sprinkle bacon crumbles evenly over the cheese. Scoop the potato mixture into the pan so it is evenly distributed. Whisk together eggs and milk with a fork, and season with a little salt and pepper. Pour evenly over the food in the pan. Bake for 20 minutes in the preheated oven, just until the egg is set. Remove from the oven and run a knife around the outer edge. Flip onto a serving plate, and remove the parchment paper. Serve and enjoy.
Place ice cubes, pineapple, banana, and pineapple juice into the bowl of a blender. Puree on high until smooth.
Dip bread slices in beaten eggs. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Cook until  browned on both sides. Set aside but keep warm. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain and set aside. Reserve 1 tablespoon of bacon grease in pan and fry remaining two eggs. Place one piece of French toast on each of two plates. Place the fried eggs on top of the bread, top the eggs with strips of bacon. Cover with the remaining pieces of French toast.  Following that by pouring on the syrup.
Preheat waffle iron. In a large mixing bowl, combine waffle mix, sugar and cinnamon. Stir in milk, eggs and vanilla extract. Spray preheated waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray. Pour mix onto hot waffle iron. Cook until golden brown. Serve hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease and flour two 9 x 5 inch loaf pans. Beat together eggs, sugar, and oil.  Blend in applesauce, and then sour cream or buttermilk.  Mix in flour, baking powder, soda, and cinnamon. Stir in raisins. Pour batter into prepared pans. Bake for 80 minutes.  Cool on wire racks.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease an 8x8 inch glass baking dish. Beat eggs in a large bowl; stir in the milk. Stir in the potatoes, ham and cheese.  Season to taste and pour into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven for 45 to 50, until knife inserted in middle comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Press hash brown potatoes between paper towels to remove excess moisture. Transfer potatoes to an 8-inch pie dish and press into the bottom and up the sides of the dish to form a crust. Drizzle with melted butter. Bake in preheated oven until golden, about 25 minutes. Remove from oven and reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Combine ham, Cheddar cheese, onion, and bell pepper in a bowl; spread mixture over potato crust. Beat eggs, milk, salt, and black pepper in the same bowl; pour over ham mixture. Bake in oven until eggs are set, 25 to 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch pie dish with 1 teaspoon olive oil. Heat 1 tablespoon olive oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion and garlic in the hot oil until garlic is fragrant, 2 to 3 minutes. Add kale, salt, and pepper; cook, stirring occasionally, until kale is wilted, about 5 minutes. Stir tomato and carrots into kale mixture; cook for 5 more minutes. Remove skillet from heat. Whisk eggs and milk together in a bowl. Stir Cheddar cheese, kale mixture, and parsley into egg mixture; pour into the prepared pie dish. Bake in the preheated oven until quiche is set in the middle and a knife inserted in the center comes out clean, about 50 minutes. Cool in pie dish for 2 to 3 minutes before slicing.
In a bowl, mash the cream cheese with beaten eggs, about 1 teaspoon at a time at first, until the mixture is smooth and free of lumps. Beat in the cinnamon and sugar-free syrup. Melt the butter in a nonstick skillet over medium heat. When the butter has stopped foaming, reduce heat to medium-low, and pour in several tablespoons of the batter. Swirl to coat the bottom of the skillet. Allow to cook until set, about 4 minutes on the first side; flip the crepe with a spatula and cook the other side until the crepe shows small browned spots, 1 to 2 more minutes.
Heat the milk and the butter together in a medium saucepan, until the butter melts. Remove from the heat and add them warm water. The mixture should be around 110 degrees F (43 degrees C). In a large bowl combine 1 cup of the flour, yeast, salt, anise seed and 1/4 cup of the sugar. Beat in the warm milk mixture then add the eggs and orange zest and beat until well combined. Stir in 1/2 cup of flour and continue adding more flour until the dough is soft. Turn the dough out onto a lightly floured surface and knead until smooth and elastic. Place the dough into a lightly greased bowl cover with plastic wrap and let rise in a warm place until doubled in size. This will take about 1 to 2 hours. Punch the dough down and shape it into a large round loaf with a round knob on top. Place dough onto a baking sheet, loosely cover with plastic wrap and let rise in a warm place for about 1 hour or until just about doubled in size. Bake in a preheated 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) oven for about 35 to 45 minutes. Remove from oven let cool slightly then brush with glaze. To make glaze: In a small saucepan combine the 1/4 cup sugar, orange juice and orange zest. Bring to a boil over medium heat and boil for 2 minutes. Brush over top of bread while still warm. Sprinkle glazed bread with white sugar.
Crack the egg into a microwave-safe cereal bowl and whisk in the milk. Season with salt and pepper. Cook in the microwave on 100% power for 1 to 2 minutes, or until cooked through. While the egg is cooking, toast the bread. Use a spoon to remove the cooked egg from the bowl and set it on one piece of toast. Top with a slice of cheese and the other piece of toast. Cook in the microwave until cheese is melted, about 15 seconds.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Grease 24 muffin cups. Mix hash brown potatoes, salt, black pepper, olive oil, and 2/3 cup shredded Cheddar cheese in a bowl. Divide mixture between prepared muffin cups and use your fingers to shape potato mixture into nests with hollows in the middle. Bake in the preheated oven until hash browns are browned on the edges and cheese has melted, 15 to 18 minutes. Remove hash brown nests. Reduce oven temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Whisk eggs and water in a bowl until thoroughly combined; season with salt and black pepper. Pour equal amount of egg mixture into each nest; sprinkle with bacon crumbles and 1 teaspoon Cheddar cheese. Bake in the oven until eggs are set, 13 to 16 minutes. Let cool in pans and remove by sliding a knife between potato crust and muffin cup.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, combine flour, baking powder and salt. In a separate bowl, cream together butter and sugar. Stir in eggs, maple syrup and mashed bananas until well blended. Add the banana mixture to the flour mixture; mix until batter is just moist. Pour batter into prepared loaf pan. Bake in preheated oven for 20 to 30 minutes, until a toothpick inserted into center of the loaf comes out clean. If using muffin or cupcake tins, bake for 15 minutes or until a toothpick inserted into the center of a muffin comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9 inch pie pan. Press potatoes into greased pie plate. Brush with melted butter. Bake in preheated oven until lightly browned, about 10 to 15 minutes. In a large bowl, stir together beaten eggs, milk, cheese, ham, salt and pepper. Pour egg mixture into baked crust. Bake in preheated oven until center is set, about 20 minutes. The quiche will be browned on top and a knife inserted into the center will come out clean.
Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, and set aside. Wrap the tortillas in foil and warm in the oven. Fry the eggs in a greased skillet until firm. In a small sauce pan heat the refried beans. Top each tortilla with refried beans, 2 strips of bacon, 1 egg and a little cheese.  Roll tortillas into burritos and serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease 12 muffin cups. Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain and set aside. In a large bowl, combine eggs, chiles, onion, garlic powder, salt pepper and sausage; mix well. Spoon 1/4 cup of sausage mixture into each prepared muffin cup. Bake in preheated oven for 15 to 20 minutes, until egg has set and a toothpick inserted into each 'muffin' comes out clean.
Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Place a colander and two cups of water in a small stock pot. Add the broccoli and bring water to a boil.  Cook until tender but still firm, about 10 minutes. Drain, cool and chop. Lightly butter a 9x13 inch baking pan. Lightly butter bread slices. Line bottom of baking pan with bread slices. Cover bread with cheese, bacon and broccoli. In a large bowl, beat together eggs, milk, mustard, salt and pepper. Pour egg mixture into pan. Refrigerate overnight or bake immediately. Twenty minutes before baking, preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Bake until eggs are solid, approximately 60 minutes.
Preheat oven to 250 degrees F (120 degrees C). Lightly grease a baking sheet. In a large bowl, combine oats, peanuts, and wheat germ. In a separate bowl, combine honey, brown sugar, vegetable oil, water, salt, and vanilla. Stir well; then pour into the oat mixture, and stir. Spread out on a cookie sheet. Bake for 1 hour, stirring every 15 minutes. Remove from oven, and cool before serving.
Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Tear corn tortillas into bite size pieces, and fry them in the skillet, stirring constantly, until they are just starting to get crisp. Pour the eggs into the skillet with the tortillas, stirring until the egg is cooked through. Season with salt to taste. Serve immediately.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Split the chiles open, and spread half the chiles into the bottom of the prepared baking dish. Layer with the Cheddar cheese, and top with the rest of the canned chiles. Whisk together the eggs, flour, and evaporated milk in a bowl. Pour the mixture over the chiles and cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until set, about 30 minutes; remove casserole, and top with the Monterey Jack cheese. Pour the green chili salsa over the top; return to oven, and bake until the cheese is melted, about 15 more minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Beat eggs in a large bowl, making sure that they are mixed very well and have a 'frothy' top. Add the milk, salt and pepper. Mix well. Stir in ham, then add cheese pieces and stir well. Pour mixture into a well greased 4 quart casserole dish and bake in the preheated oven for 50 to 60 minutes or until top is lightly browned.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x5 inch baking pan. Stir together apples, sugar and oil. Add egg; mix well. In a separate bowl, sift together flour, baking powder, baking soda and cinnamon. Stir flour mixture into wet ingredients, mixing just until dry ingredients are moist. Stir in cranberries and walnuts. Spread batter into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven for 35 to 45 minutes, until toothpick inserted into center of loaf comes out clean.
Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Remove bacon from pan, drain and crumble; leave grease in pan. Heat bacon grease over medium heat and stir in butter. Add onion and potatoes. Cover pan and cook, stirring occasionally, until potatoes are golden brown. Crack eggs on top of potatoes and stir gently to combine. Sprinkle with salt, pepper, cheese and bacon. Continue cooking until eggs are firm and cheese is melted.
In a large, heavy skillet, heat the oil to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Carefully stir in the onion and tortilla strips. Fry until tortilla strips are crisp and golden brown. Remove from heat, and drain on paper towels. Drain the skillet, leaving only a thin residue of oil. Over medium heat, return tortillas to the skillet, and stir in the eggs. Season with salt. Cook and stir until eggs are firm. Mix Mexican style hot tomato sauce and water into the skillet. Reduce heat, and simmer until thickened, about 10 minutes. Top with cheese. Continue cooking until cheese has melted.
In a bowl, combine flour, Splenda, and baking powder. Stir in egg substitute and ricotta cheese until well blended. Gently fold in blueberries. Pour 1/4 cup batter onto hot griddle for each pancake. Cook until bubbles form on top, then turn to brown other side. Serve immediately with choice of condiments.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease cookie sheets or line with parchment paper. In a large bowl, stir together the brown sugar, oats, flour, baking soda, baking powder, salt and cinnamon. Make a well in the center and pour in the canola oil, prune puree, water, egg whites and vanilla. Mix until well blended. Stir in the raisins, walnuts and apricots. Scoop cookies using an ice cream scoop, or roll into golf ball sized balls. Place cookies 2 inches apart onto the prepared cookie sheets and flatten to 1/2 tall with wet hands. These cookies do not flatten very much while baking. In the preheated oven, bake 8 minutes for chewy cookies 10 to 12 minutes for dry cookies. Cookies will not get crisp. Remove from cookie sheets to cool on wire racks.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C) and line a 9-inch pie plate with thawed pie crust; refrigerate until ready to fill. Heat olive oil in a medium skillet over medium high heat. Saute onion and bell pepper for 3 minutes, stirring frequently. Add flour, then cook and stir for an additional 2 minutes. Finally, stir in chicken, salt, nutmeg and pepper and mix well. Spread chicken mixture over the bottom of the unbaked pie shell, and top with Cheddar cheese and Swiss cheese. In a small bowl whip together the egg beat, milk and sour cream and pour mixture over chicken mixture. Bake at 400 degrees F (200 degrees C) for 20 minutes, then reduce temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and bake for another 30 to 35 minutes, or until a knife inserted into the pie comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Arrange biscuits about 1 1/2 inches apart on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, 13 to 17 minutes. Slice cooked biscuits in half crosswise and keep warm. While biscuits are baking, crumble sausage into a large skillet over medium heat; cook, breaking meat apart, until no longer pink inside, about 10 minutes. Sprinkle sausage and pan drippings with flour and cook and stir until sausage is coated, about 1 more minute. Reduce heat to medium-low. Pour evaporated milk into sausage mixture, followed by milk; stir until thoroughly combined. Bring to a simmer, stirring constantly, and cook until gravy is your desired thickness, 3 to 5 minutes. Season with salt and ground black pepper. Stir butter into gravy until melted. Stir in more flour if gravy isn't thick enough. Place biscuits with cut sides up on serving plates; top with sausage gravy.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray 12 muffin cups with cooking spray. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir asparagus, green bell pepper, and onion in the hot oil until softened, 5 to 10 minutes. Whisk eggs, milk, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl. Mix cooked vegetables and Cheddar cheese into egg mixture. Spoon about 1/4 cup mixture into each muffin cup. Bake in the preheated oven until frittatas are set in the middle and lightly browned, about 20 minutes.
In a blender combine frozen banana, orange juice, apple and milk. Blend until smooth. pour into glasses and serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place potatoes in a large pan, fill with water to cover potatoes, and bring to a boil. Cook until potatoes are just soft. Drain, place in a large bowl. While the potatoes are still hot, gently stir in cheese without mashing potatoes. Continue to stir, every minute or so, until cheese is melted. In a separate bowl, stir together mayonnaise, onion, and bacon. Gently stir into potatoes and cheese. Spread into a 13x9-inch baking dish. Bake in a preheated oven for 50 minutes.
Cook the bacon in a skillet over medium heat until crisp, then remove to drain on a paper towel. Chop bacon into small pieces. Beat eggs and milk together in a small bowl until smooth. Stir in the bacon bits, Cheddar cheese, and onion; season to taste with salt and pepper. Melt butter in a small skillet over medium heat, pour in eggs, and cook, stirring constantly, until they reach the desired consistency. While frying, keep tossing all the ingredients around with a spoon also use a fork to crush up the eggs so they are more scrambled.
Stir together apricot nectar, pineapple juice, water, and orange juice concentrate in a large pitcher until combined. Pour in bottle of sparkling wine just before serving.
Sift together the flour, cream of wheat, sugar, baking soda, baking powder, and salt in a large bowl; set bowl aside. Whisk together the milk, sour cream, vegetable oil, egg, and vanilla in a separate bowl. Make a well in the center of the dry ingredients, and stir in the wet ingredients. Do not overmix the batter. Heat a large skillet over medium heat. Pour 1/3 cupfuls of batter onto the skillet, and cook until bubbles appear on the surface. Flip with a spatula, and cook until browned on the other side.
In a large mixing bowl, combine the eggs, milk, cinnamon, sugar and applesauce; mix well. Soak bread one slice at a time until saturated with liquid. Cook on a lightly greased skillet or griddle over medium/high heat until lightly browned on both sides. Serve hot.
Place warm water, egg, butter or margarine, flour, powdered milk, sugar, cinnamon, vanilla, salt, and yeast into the bread machine in the order suggested by the manufacturer. Start the machine. After the first rise, add the dried cranberries.  Continue baking.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease 18 muffin cups with cooking spray. Roll out biscuit dough on a lightly floured surface to form 5-inch rounds. Place each round in the prepared muffin cups, pressing into the base and sides to form a dough cup. Cook and stir sausage in a skillet over medium-high heat until browned and cooked through, 5 to 10 minutes; drain fat. Spoon sausage into dough cups. Whisk eggs, milk, salt, and pepper together in a bowl until well-beaten. Pour egg mixture into each dough cup, filling each just below the top of the biscuit dough. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese on top of egg mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set and biscuit dough is golden, 15 to 18 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Fit pie crust into a 9-inch pie dish. Whisk eggs, milk, parsley, garlic, salt, black pepper, and nutmeg in a bowl. Gently combine spinach, mushrooms, onion, and feta cheese in a separate bowl. Spread spinach-mushroom mixture in the prepared pie dish; top with half the Swiss cheese. Pour egg mixture evenly over the filling, swirling egg mixture in bowl to spread seasonings through the eggs; top the quiche with remaining Swiss cheese. Place quiche on a baking sheet. Bake in preheated oven until the quiche is lightly puffed and browned, 45 to 50 minutes. A toothpick inserted into the center of the filling should come out clean. Cool for 30 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Mix hash brown potatoes, sour cream, onion, cream of chicken soup, Colby cheese, and melted butter in a bowl; season to taste with salt and black pepper. Transfer mixture into a 9x13-inch baking dish and sprinkle top with corn flake crumbs. Bake in the preheated oven until the casserole is bubbling, about 1 hour.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 5x9-inch loaf pan. Mash 2 bananas in a bowl with a fork. Place remaining 2 bananas in a separate bowl with 1 cup sugar and beat the bananas and sugar with an electric mixer until creamed and fluffy, 3 minutes. Beat in melted butter, eggs, sour cream, and vanilla extract until thoroughly combined. Whisk flour, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl and stir the flour mixture into banana-sugar mixture. Fold in mashed bananas and walnuts. Pour batter into prepared loaf pan and tap the pan on the counter several times to remove any air pockets. Stir 2 teaspoons sugar with cinnamon in a small bowl and sprinkle the cinnamon sugar over the top of the loaf. Bake in the preheated oven until bread is golden brown on top and set in the center, 1 hour and 15 minutes; rotate bread pan in oven halfway through baking. Cool in the pan for 10 minutes before removing to finish cooling on a wire rack.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray two 8x4 inch loaf pans with non-stick cooking spray. Combine the flour, brown sugar, baking soda, baking powder, salt, ground cinnamon and ground cloves in a large bowl and mix well. Set aside. Mix the egg substitute, cranberry sauce, pureed pumpkin, vegetable oil and grated orange zest together. Add this mixture to the flour mixture and stir until just moistened. Pour batter into the prepared pans. Sprinkle the top of each loaf with the chopped nuts. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 55 to 60 minutes or until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean. Let loaves cool for 10 minutes then remove from pans. Can be made even lower in fat by substituting 1/3 cup applesauce for the 1/3 cup vegetable oil.
Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Heat oil in a skillet over medium high heat. Add onion and saute until soft, about 3 to 5 minutes. In a large bowl, beat together eggs, cream, basil, oregano, salt and pepper. Spoon the onions into the pie crust. Pour the egg mixture over the onions. Sprinkle shredded cheese on top. Bake in preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into center of the quiche comes out clean, about 30 to 40 minutes. Let cool slightly before serving.
In a large saucepan, bring the water to a boil. Combine the powdered milk, oats and cinnamon; quickly stir into the boiling water. Return the mixture to a boil, then reduce heat and simmer for 5 to 10 minutes, or until the mixture is the desired thickness. Remove from heat and mix in the raisins and vanilla. Beat in the eggs one at a time, mixing well after each. The hot porridge will  cook the eggs completely. Divide the porridge between 4 bowls.  Top each one with a teaspoon of butter, 1/4 cup of milk , and drizzle with honey.
In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt. In a small bowl, mix the vanilla soy milk, egg, oil, vanilla extract, and almond extract. Pour the soy milk mixture into the bowl with the flour mixture, and whisk together until smooth. Grease a skillet, and heat over medium low heat. Pour about 1/4 cup batter onto the heated skillet, and cook until bubbly. Flip with a spatula, and continue cooking about 1 minute, until golden brown. Repeat with the remaining batter.
Heat a lightly oiled skillet over medium heat. Whisk eggs, half and half, pumpkin, cinnamon, vanilla extract, pumpkin pie spice, and walnuts together in a bowl. Soak one slice of bread at a time in the pumpkin mixture, then place in the prepared skilled. Repeat with the remaining slices of bread. Stir the pumpkin mixture between dips to keep the walnuts from settling. Cook the bread until golden brown, about 3 minutes on each side.
Whisk together milk, eggs, peanut butter, sugar, vanilla extract, and cinnamon in a large bowl. Heat the oil in a griddle or frying pan over medium heat. Dunk each slice of bread in egg mixture, soaking both sides. Place in pan, and cook on both sides until golden, about 3 to 4 minutes per side. Serve hot.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C).  Oil a 9 x 4 inch pan. In a small bowl, combine flour, cinnamon, salt, nuts, and raisins. In a large bowl, blend eggs, sugar, and oil.  Mix baking soda into pulp, and add to sugar mixture.  Fold in flour mixture.  Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake for 75 minutes, or until tester inserted in the center comes out clean.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Sift flour and baking powder together into a bowl. Lightly beat eggs, and mix them into the flour with the oil. Stir in the onion and zucchini, and season with salt and pepper. Pour mixture into a well-greased 9x13 inch baking dish, and sprinkle with paprika and parsley. Bake in preheated oven for one hour.
Combine undiluted soup, sour cream, hash browns, cubed chicken and ham, onions, and cheese.  Pour into a lightly greased 9 x 13 inch pan. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 30 minutes.  Top with crumbs, and drizzle with melted butter or margarine.  Bake for another 15 minutes.
Melt one tablespoon butter in a medium skillet over medium heat. Place onion and bell pepper inside of the skillet. Cook for 4 to 5 minutes stirring occasionally until vegetables are just tender. While the vegetables are cooking beat the eggs with the milk, 1/2 teaspoon salt and pepper. Shred the cheese into a small bowl and set it aside. Remove the vegetables from heat, transfer them to another bowl and sprinkle the remaining 1/4 teaspoon salt over them. Melt the remaining 1 tablespoon butter (in the skillet just used to cook the vegetables) over medium heat. Coat the skillet with the butter. When the butter is bubbly add the egg mixture and cook the egg for 2 minutes or until the eggs begin to set on the bottom of the pan. Gently lift the edges of the omelet with a spatula to let the uncooked part of the eggs flow toward the edges and cook. Continue cooking for 2 to 3 minutes or until the center of the omelet starts to look dry. Sprinkle the cheese over the omelet and spoon the vegetable mixture into the center of the omelet. Using a spatula gently fold one edge of the omelet over the vegetables. Let the omelet cook for another two minutes or until the cheese melts to your desired consistency. Slide the omelet out of the skillet and onto a plate. Cut in half and serve.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9 inch pie or cake pan. In a large bowl, mix together flour, milk, eggs butter and salt. Stir until smooth. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven for 10 minutes.  Reduce heat to 325 degrees cooking for additional 5 minutes.  Serve immediately.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a quiche dish or 9 inch pie pan with the 8 ounces of Muenster cheese slices. Carefully press all of the water out of the spinach and place it in a large mixing bowl. Add eggs, Parmesan cheese, cream cheese, salt, pepper and garlic powder; stir well. Spoon mixture into pan and top with remaining cheese slices. Bake in preheated oven for 35 minutes and allow to set up for 10 minutes before serving. Decrease oven temperature by 25 degrees F if using glass pie dish.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease two 9x5 inch loaf pans. In a large bowl, sift together flour, baking powder, baking soda and salt. In a large bowl, beat together the sugar and oil. Stir in the eggs one at a time, beating well with each addition, then stir in the vanilla.  Blend this mixture into the flour mixture, alternately with the sour cream; stir just to combine. Fold in the zucchini and nuts; mixing just enough to evenly combine. Pour batter into prepared pans. Bake in preheated oven for 80 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted into the center of the loaf comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Place the bacon in a large, deep skillet, and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on a paper towel-lined plate. Chop when cool. Fit the pie crust into a 9-inch pie dish, and set aside. In a bowl, whisk together the eggs, cream, salt, black pepper, Worcestershire sauce, and hot pepper sauce. Spread the spinach into the bottom of the pie crust; top with bacon, Cheddar cheese, and green onion. Pour the egg mixture over the filling, and sprinkle the quiche with Parmesan cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until the top is lightly puffed and browned, and a knife inserted into the center of the quiche comes out clean, 35 to 45 minutes.
Mix eggs, cottage cheese, milk, vanilla, butter, and peach in a large bowl. Combine flour, sugar, salt, baking soda, and cinnamon in a small bowl. Stir flour mixture into the cottage cheese mixture until just combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter.
Stir the eggs and Parmesan cheese together in a bowl; set aside. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat; cook the zucchini in the hot oil until softened and lightly browned, about 7 minutes. Season the zucchini with garlic powder, salt, and pepper. Reduce heat to medium; pour the egg mixture into the skillet. Cook, stirring gently, for about 3 minutes. Remove the skillet from the heat and cover. Keep covered off the heat until the eggs set, about 2 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9 inch pie pan. In a medium bowl, mix together the baking mix, 1/4 teaspoon salt, and pepper. Gradually mix in the milk until moistened. Knead a few times on a floured board. Roll dough out to a 12 inch circle, and press into the greased pie pan. Fold edges, and flute. Place bacon and onion in a large, deep skillet over medium-high heat, and cook until bacon is evenly brown. Drain, and crumble bacon. Sprinkle bacon, onion, and Cheddar cheese into the pie pan. In a medium bowl, beat eggs with 1 teaspoon salt and hot pepper sauce, then slowly stir in hot evaporated milk. Pour into the pie shell. Bake 5 minutes in the preheated oven, then reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Continue baking 25 minutes, or until center is almost set. Do not over bake - the quiche will set as it cools.
Place noodles in a saucepan filled with boiling water, reserving the seasoning packet. Cook until tender, and drain. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs and seasoning packets from the noodles.  Mix in noodles. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat.  Add the noodle mixture, and cook over medium-low heat until firm, 5 to 7 minutes. Cut into fourths, and turn over to brown the other side for 1 to 2 minutes. Sprinkle cheese over the top, and serve.
In the container of a blender, combine the mixed berries, strawberry yogurt, banana, milk and sugar. Cover, and blend until smooth. Pour into glasses and serve.
Rinse the rice in 3 to 4 changes of water until the rinse water is almost clear, and drain off the rinse water. Bring the rice and 4 cups of water to a boil in a saucepan over high heat. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until the rice is tender and the liquid has been absorbed, 20 to 25 minutes. Place the chicken in a nonstick skillet with a lid, and cook and stir over medium heat until the chicken is no longer pink inside and beginning to brown, about 5 minutes. Stir in the onion, and cook and stir until the onion is soft, about 5 more minutes. Pour in the stock, and whisk in soy sauce, mirin, and brown sugar, stirring to dissolve the sugar. Bring the mixture to a boil, and let simmer until slightly reduced, about 10 minutes. Whisk the eggs in a bowl until well-beaten, and pour over the chicken and stock. Cover the skillet, reduce heat, and allow to steam for about 5 minutes, until the egg is cooked. Remove from heat. To serve, place 1 cup of cooked rice per bowl into 4 deep soup bowls, top each bowl with 1/4 of the chicken and egg mixture, and spoon about 1/2 cup of soup into each bowl.
In a blender, combine milk, banana, strawberries, yogurt and honey. Blend until smooth. Pour into glass and serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 Degrees C).  Grease and flour a 9 x 5 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, beat together the sugars and sunflower oil.  Sift flour, baking powder, baking soda, cinnamon, and salt into the bowl while stirring occasionally.  Beat the eggs together, and gradually stir into the batter until everything is combined.  Mix in carrots, pecans, and vanilla until well combined.  Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake on middle rack for 60 minutes, or until it tests done.  Cool in pan for 10 minutes, and then turn out onto wire rack to cool completely.
Heat olive oil in a skillet or frying pan over medium-high heat. Add mushrooms, onions and peppers; saute until onions are transparent. In a mixing bowl, beat together eggs and milk. Add egg mixture to vegetables; stir in tomatoes. Cook until eggs are set. When eggs are almost done, mix in cheese.  Serve immediately.
Refrigerate coffee until cool, about 30 minutes. Chill four glasses, if desired. Stir vanilla extract and sugar in the boiling water until dissolved. Refrigerate until cool, about 30 minutes. Divide the ice and chilled coffee evenly between the four glasses. Stir in cream and sugar mixture, to taste.
Mix three parts of your favorite sparkling white to one part of your favorite orange juice.  Enjoy!
In a mixing bowl, combine flour, egg, and milk. Heat a large skillet or crepe pan over a medium-high heat. Spray the pan with non-stick cooking spray. Pour about 1/3 cup of batter into the pan, lift the pan and turn it by rotating your wrist, spreading a PAPER THIN amount in the pan.  Flip the crepe when it starts to bubble. When it is finished cooking, remove it and repeat this process with the remaining batter.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil and set a wire rack over the foil. Use a baking sheet that has sides to catch the grease. In a small bowl, stir together the brown sugar, mustard powder, cinnamon, nutmeg, and cayenne pepper. Press each slice of bacon into the mixture until coated. Twist each strip a few times and place on the prepared baking rack. Bake until bacon is browned and crisp enough to hold its shape, about 30 minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Combine flour, wheat germ, sugar, cinnamon, pumpkin pie spice, nutmeg, salt, and baking powder in a bowl. Set aside. Beat together milk, pumpkin puree, butter, oil, applesauce, whole egg, and egg white. Stir flour mixture into the pumpkin mixture along with the pecans. Ladle the batter onto the preheated waffle iron. Cook the waffles until golden and crisp, 5 to 7 minutes.
Place milk, eggs, 1/4 cup butter, bread flour, sugar, salt, and yeast into a bread machine in the order recommended by the manufacturer, select the dough setting, and start the machine. When dough cycle is complete, transfer dough to a floured work surface and punch down. Let dough rest for 10 minutes. Mix walnuts, brown sugar, and cinnamon in a bowl. Divide dough in half and roll each half into a rectangle about 9x14 inches. Spread 1 tablespoon softened butter over the top of each dough rectangle and evenly sprinkle dough with half the walnut mixture. Roll dough rectangles, starting from the short ends, and pinch seams closed. Grease 2 9x5-inch loaf pans. Fit the rolled loaves into the loaf pans with seam sides down. Cover and let rise until nearly doubled in size, about 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake loaves in the preheated oven until lightly golden brown and bread sounds hollow when tapped, about 30 minutes. If loaves brown too quickly, lightly cover with aluminum foil for the last 10 minutes of baking. Let bread cool for 10 minutes before removing to finish cooling on wire racks. Sprinkle tops of each loaf with 1 teaspoon confectioners' sugar.
Mix zucchini, Cheddar cheese, and onion together in a bowl. Stir eggs and biscuit mix into zucchini mixture until well combined. Heat vegetable oil on the griddle or large skillet over medium heat. Scoop about 1/4 cup batter onto heated griddle; cook until pancakes are browned, 3 to 4 minutes per side. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend milk, yogurt, banana, peanut butter, spinach, and ice cubes until smooth.
In a medium bowl, mix together the oats and buttermilk. Cover, and refrigerate overnight. The next morning: In a large bowl, sift together the flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, cinnamon, and salt. Make a well in the center, and pour in the oatmeal mixture, eggs, butter, and raisins. Stir until just moistened. Allow batter to sit 20 minutes before cooking. If batter is too thick, add buttermilk 1 tablespoon at a time, until the batter reaches the desired consistency. Heat a lightly greased, large skillet or griddle over medium heat. Pour 1/4 cup batter onto the hot griddle for each cake. Cook pancakes until bubbles appear on top, flip, and cook until lightly browned on bottom.
Sprinkle the yeast and white sugar over warm milk in a small bowl. The milk should be no more than 100 degrees F (40 degrees C). Let stand for 15 minutes until the yeast softens and begins to form a creamy foam. Whisk the eggs, melted butter, and vanilla extract into the yeast mixture until evenly blended; set aside. Stir together the flour and salt in a separate large bowl, and make a well in the center. Pour the egg mixture into the well, then stir in the flour mixture until a soft dough forms. Cover with a light cloth and let rise in a warm place (80 to 95 degrees F (27 to 35 degrees C)) until doubled in volume, about 30 minutes. Gently mix in the pearl sugar. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Place a baseball-size ball of dough on the preheated waffle iron. Cook waffles until golden and crisp, about 2 minutes. Repeat with remaining dough. Allow waffles to cool for 2 to 3 minutes before serving.
In a medium saucepan, heat water to boiling. Reduce heat to low; stir in oats and salt. Cook until oats have thickened, about 5 minutes. Place 1 teaspoon of butter and 1 tablespoon of brown sugar in the bottom of each four serving bowls. Spoon oatmeal into each bowl and stir until butter and sugar are melted. Pour 1/4 cup of creamer and 1 tablespoon of milk over each bowl. Top each serving with another tablespoon of brown sugar. Serve hot.
Whisk the eggs. eggnog, cinnamon, and pumpkin pie spice together in a mixing bowl until well blended. Pour the mixture into a shallow dish. Preheat an electric skillet to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Lightly grease the skillet. Dip one slice of bread at a time into the eggnog mixture, being sure to coat each side of the bread thoroughly. Place the prepared bread slices into the preheated skillet, and cook, turning once, until golden brown on each side. Place cooked slices on a serving plate and cover with foil to keep warm until all French toast is cooked. Serve immediately.
Whisk together the pancake mix, white sugar, cinnamon, the 1/3 teaspoon nutmeg, and ginger; set aside. Beat together the eggs, milk, pumpkin, and vegetable oil. Combine the two mixtures, stirring just until all ingredients are moistened. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium-high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Bubbles will start to form in the pancakes. Cook until the edges of the pancakes start to look dry, and a bubble popped near the edge holds its shape. Flip the pancakes over, and continue cooking until the other side is golden brown. Repeat with remaining batter, adding more oil to the griddle if necessary. Stack the pancakes on a plate and keep warm until serving. For larger batches, keep pancakes warm in a single layer on a cooling rack positioned over a baking sheet in a 300 degrees F oven (150 degrees C). Place whipping cream in a small, deep, chilled bowl. Add the 2 tablespoons sugar, vanilla, and nutmeg; beat using a mixer with chilled beaters on medium-high speed until soft peaks form.
Sift flour, sugar, baking powder, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a bowl. Whisk milk, pumpkin, egg, and oil together in a bowl. Pour milk mixture into flour mixture and stir until just moistened. Batter will be slightly lumpy. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 1 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 1 minute more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Bake biscuits according to package directions. Cook the bacon in a deep skillet over medium heat until crisp, about 10 minutes. Remove bacon to a paper towel lined plate and keep the grease in the pan. Gradually stir in the flour so that no lumps form, then mix in the milk, continuing to cook and stir until thickened. Crumble the bacon into the gravy and season with salt and pepper before serving. Split biscuits in half, top with gravy, and enjoy!
Place the pumpkin puree in a freezer bag; store in freezer for at least 24 hours. Heat the bag of pumpkin puree in the microwave on HIGH to soften, 1 to 2 minutes. Pour the milk into a blender. Add the brown sugar, cinnamon, and pumpkin; blend until smooth.
Place turkey sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a large bowl, stir together eggs, green onions, hash browns, milk, cheddar cheese and cooked sausage. Pour mixture into a 9x13 inch baking pan. Bake in preheated oven for 60 minutes.
In a large bowl, stir together the eggs, milk, yogurt and oil until well blended. Combine the flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt and cinnamon, stir into the milk mixture until smooth. Fold in chopped apple. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each cake. Cook until bubbles form in the cakes and the bottoms are golden brown. Flip and cook the other side. Serve warm with syrup or jam.
Generously coat a large frying pan with cooking spray. Cook and stir chorizo over medium high heat until well browned and crumbled. Add onion and chile pepper, and continue cooking until onion is tender. Beat eggs in a bowl, and add to chorizo mixture. Reduce heat to medium-low, and continue cooking and stirring until eggs are scrambled and no longer runny. Warm flour tortillas in the microwave for 30 seconds. Spoon mixture into the middle of each tortilla and top with shredded Cheddar cheese. Roll up like a burrito, and enjoy!
Whisk buckwheat flour, sugar, baking powder, salt, and baking soda together in a bowl. Beat buttermilk, egg, and vanilla extract together in another bowl. Pour flour mixture into buttermilk mixture; whisk until batter is thick and smooth. Let batter rest for 5 minutes until bubbles form and batter relaxes. Melt butter on a griddle over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Melt butter in an oven-safe skillet over medium heat. Stir in olive oil and asparagus, and cook until the asparagus is tender, about 10 minutes. Stir in the mushrooms, and continue cooking about 5 minutes. In a medium bowl, whisk together eggs, water, and thyme. Pour into the skillet, and reduce heat to low. Cover, and cook 5 minutes. Transfer the skillet to the preheated oven. Bake 10 to 15 minutes, until eggs are no longer runny. Top the mixture with Parmesan cheese and mozzarella cheese. Turn on the broiler, and broil until cheeses are melted and lightly browned.
Preheat a griddle to medium heat. Whisk flour, baking powder, sugar, and salt together in a mixing bowl. Combine milk, banana, peanut butter, egg, canola oil, and vanilla extract in a separate bowl; pour into the flour mixture and whisk together until thoroughly mixed. Ladle batter in 1/4 cup portions onto hot griddle. Cook until tiny air bubbles form on top, 2 to 5 minutes; flip and continue cooking until the bottoms are browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Keep finished pancakes warm.
Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add potatoes, and cook until tender but still firm, 12 to 15 minutes; drain. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Cut into small chunks; set aside. Place potatoes into skillet, and cook on medium heat until browned. Flip potatoes occasionally to prevent sticking. Stir in green pepper, red pepper, onion, and mushrooms. Cook until vegetables are tender. Stir in cooked bacon, and season with salt and pepper. Cover with shredded cheese, and turn mixture until cheese is melted. Keep on low heat while cooking eggs. Cook eggs to your preferred style. Place potatoes in a large serving dish, and top with eggs (2 per serving).
In a bowl, mix together water, sour cream, yogurt, and vinegar. Sift flour into a separate, large bowl; stir in baking powder, baking soda, and salt. Add sour cream mixture and eggs to flour mixture; blend until smooth. Cook on a lightly greased waffle iron until golden brown; lift off with a fork.
In a large bowl, sift together flour, sugar, baking powder and salt. Stir in the remaining ingredients; mix until smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each crepe. Tilt the pan with a circular motion so that the batter coats the surface evenly. Cook the crepe for about 2 minutes, until the bottom is light brown. Loosen with a spatula, turn and cook the other side. Stack the finished crepes by putting wax paper between each one. Keep covered with a dry cloth until ready to eat.
Place ingredients in the bread machine pan in the order suggested by the manufacturer.  Select the dough cycle. Divide dough into two unequal parts, and shape into loaves. Place in one 9 x 5 inch loaf pan and one 7 x 3 inch loaf pan; non-stick pans are preferable, but greased and floured normal pans will suffice.  Cover, and allow to raise until doubled in size. Bake at 400 degrees F (205 degrees C) for about 15 minutes.  Grandma bakes hers longer for a more browned and chewier crust.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking pan. In a large bowl, cream together the sugar and margarine until light and fluffy. Stir in the eggs one at a time, beating well with each addition, then stir in the vanilla. In a large bowl, sift together flour, baking soda and salt. Blend this mixture into the egg mixture, alternately with the buttermilk; stir just to combine. Fold in the mashed bananas; mixing just enough to evenly combine. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into center of the loaf comes our clean, about 60 minutes.
Rinse quinoa in a fine strainer with cold water to remove bitterness until water runs clear and is no longer frothy. Heat milk in a saucepan over medium heat until warm, 2 to 3 minutes. Stir quinoa and salt into the milk; simmer over medium-low heat until much of the liquid has been absorbed, about 20 minutes. Remove saucepan from heat. Stir maple syrup and lemon zest into the quinoa mixture. Gently fold blueberries into the mixture. Divide quinoa mixture between 2 bowls; top each with 1 teaspoon flax seed to serve.
Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Dissolve yeast and sugar in warm water in a bowl. Let stand until the yeast softens and begins to form a creamy foam, about 5 to 10 minutes. Combine yeast mixture, rice flour, sorghum flour, potato starch, cornstarch, vegetable oil, eggs, xanthan gum, and salt together in the bowl of a stand mixer; mix on medium speed until incorporated, about 2 minutes. Spoon dough into the prepared loaf pan. Smooth the top of dough with the back of a wet spoon. Place dough in a warm place until it has risen just over the top of the loaf pan, about 1 hour. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until loaf is medium golden brown, about 25 minutes.
Whisk whole wheat flour, unbleached flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl; store in an airtight container.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease an 8x4 inch loaf pan. Use an electric coffee grinder or food processor to grind 1/2 cup flax seed; set aside. In a large mixing bowl, beat together banana, oil, sugar and eggs. In a separate bowl, mix together flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, ground flax seed and 1/4 cup whole flax seed. Gradually stir flour mixture into banana mixture. Fold in dates. Spoon batter into prepared loaf pan. Bake in preheated oven for 55 to 60 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted into the loaf comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray two 9x5 inch loaf pans with non-stick cooking spray. Cream the shortening and sugar until light. Beat in the eggs one at a time. Sift together the flour, salt, baking soda, cinnamon, cloves, and nutmeg. Add to the shortening mixture and mix to combine. Thoroughly mash the bananas. Stir bananas into the batter then stir in the walnuts. Pour the batter into the prepared pans. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 45 minutes to 1 hour or until a wooden skewer inserted near the center comes out clean. Check with a wooden skewer every 15 minutes after 45 minutes of baking. It can take up to 65 to 70 minutes to cook.
In a blender combine banana, milk, honey and nutmeg. Blend until smooth.
Set a nonstick skillet over medium heat. In a medium bowl, stir together the pancake mix and flax seed meal. In a separate bowl or measuring cup, whisk together the milk and eggs. Pour the liquid into the dry ingredients, and stir just until moistened. Spoon 1/4 cupfuls of batter onto the hot skillet. Sprinkle with as many blueberries as desired. Cook until bubbles appear on the surface, then flip and cook until browned on the other side.
In the order suggested by the manufacturer, place milk, egg, egg yolk, bread flour, salt, butter, sugar and bread machine yeast in bread machine. Select Dough cycle, and press Start. Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease a large baking sheet. On a lightly floured surface, punch down dough, and divide into 36 pieces. Roll pieces into balls. Arrange balls in a single layer on the prepared baking sheet, about 2 inches apart. Allow balls to rise 15 to 20 minutes. Flatten balls, and make a depression in the center of each. Fill each with 1 piece of sausage, about 1 tablespoon hash browns, and 1 quarter slice of cheese. Bake 15 to 18 minutes in the preheated oven, or until lightly browned.
Bring water, salt, and pepper to boil in a slow cooker set to High. Stir in steel cut oats, cover, and cook 90 minutes. In a large bowl, mix beef, pork, and onions. Stir into the oat mixture, and reduce heat to Low. Cover, and continue cooking 3 hours, stirring occasionally. Transfer the mixture to a medium baking pan, and cool until semi-solid. Turn out onto wax paper, and chill 1 hour in the refrigerator, or until firm. Heat oil in a large, heavy skillet over medium high heat. Cut the refrigerated mixture into thin slices. Cook slices one at a time in the heated oil until evenly brown.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease the bottom of a 9x11 inch baking dish. Cook the sausage in a skillet over medium heat until crumbly and beginning to brown; drain. Stir the cream cheese into the cooked sausage. Roll the dough from one can of crescent rolls into the bottom of the prepared baking dish without separating. Bake in the preheated oven for 5 minutes. Spread the sausage mixture over the baked crescent rolls; top the sausage mixture with the remaining can of rolls. Return to oven and bake until the top layer is golden brown, about 8 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Line a 9 inch pie plate with thawed pie crust. Keep in refrigerator until ready to fill. In medium frying pan, heat olive oil on medium-high.  Add onion and green pepper.  Cook three minutes, stirring frequently.  Add flour and cook for two minutes, stirring frequently.  Stir in chicken, salt, nutmeg and pepper. Spread this mixture over bottom of unbaked pie shell and top with Cheddar and Swiss cheese. Combine eggs, milk and sour cream, mix until smooth.  Pour over chicken mixture. Bake in preheated oven for 20 minutes. Reduce temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and bake 30 to 35 minutes until inserted knife comes out clean.
Generously grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Arrange half the bread cubes in the prepared baking dish. Evenly distribute cream cheese cubes over the bread cube layer; sprinkle 1 1/2 cups sliced strawberries atop cream cheese layer. Layer the remaining bread cubes over strawberry layer. Pour half-and-half into a blender; pulse for a few seconds. Blend eggs into half-and-half until fully incorporated. Add maple syrup and blend until smooth. Pour mixture evenly over bread mixture. Cover the baking dish with aluminum foil and refrigerate 8 hours or overnight. Remove baking dish from refrigerator 45 minutes before baking. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake the covered casserole in the preheated oven for 30 minutes. Remove aluminum foil and continue baking until French toast is puffed and golden brown, about 30 more minutes. Stir sugar, water, and cornstarch together in a small saucepan. Cook, stirring occasionally, over medium heat until mixture has thickened, about 5 minutes. Mix in 1 cup sliced strawberries; cook and stir until strawberries have softened, about 10 minutes. Add butter; stir until melted. Serve hot over French toast.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8x8-inch baking dish with butter. Beat eggs, sour cream, milk, and salt in a bowl until blended. Stir in green onions. Pour mixture in the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until set, 25 to 30 minutes. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese over eggs and continue baking until cheese is melted, 2 to 3 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Whisk 2 eggs, cream, white sugar, salt, 1 pinch cayenne pepper, cinnamon, and allspice together in a bowl until batter is thoroughly combined. Lay bread slices into batter, one at a time, and let bread absorb the mixture. Turn bread slices in batter until almost all batter has been absorbed, about 10 minutes. Heat a large skillet over medium heat, and melt butter in the hot skillet. Cook bread slices in the hot butter until browned, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Transfer French toast slices to a baking sheet. Lay ham slices into the hot skillet and cook until meat begins to brown, about 1 minute per side. To assemble, place a Cheddar cheese slice on a slice of French toast, top with 2 slices of ham, and lay a Havarti cheese slice over ham. Bake in the preheated oven until French toast pieces are no longer wet, the batter is set, and cheese has melted and begun to brown, about 20 minutes. Place sandwiches on serving plates and top each with 2 poached eggs. Season with kosher salt and a pinch of cayenne pepper.
Place 1 cup milk in a microwave-safe bowl; heat in microwave until bubbling, about 2 minutes. Stir in the oats. Mix flour, brown sugar, baking powder, salt, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Whisk eggs, 2 teaspoons melted butter, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl; add 1/4 cup milk. Mix oat mixture and egg mixture with flour mixture; stir to combine. Heat 2 teaspoons butter on a griddle or skillet over medium heat; pour about 1/3 cup batter into the hot butter. Cook pancakes until bubbles appear on top layer, about 5 minutes. Flip and cook other side until evenly browned, about 5 more minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease 6 muffin cups. Bring the quinoa and water to a boil in a saucepan. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until the quinoa is tender and the water has been absorbed, 15 to 20 minutes. Combine cooked quinoa, eggs, egg whites, zucchini, Swiss cheese, ham, parsley, Parmesan cheese, and white pepper in a large bowl and mix until thoroughly combined. Spoon mixture to the top of each prepared muffin cup. Bake in preheated oven until the edges of frittatas are golden brown, about 30 minutes.  Allow to cool at least 5 minutes in the pan before serving.  Serve hot or cold.
Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir onion and garlic in the melted butter until onion is tender, 5 to 7 minutes. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Combine onion mixture, mashed potatoes, flour, eggs, salt, and black pepper in a large bowl until well blended. Scoop 1/4 to 1/2 cup batter (depending on size of waffle iron) into the center of waffle iron and close lid. Cook until golden brown, 3 to 5 minutes.
Stir the oats, soy milk, pumpkin puree, and cinnamon together in a saucepan; bring to a gentle boil. Reduce heat to low and simmer 5 minutes, or until the oatmeal reaches your desired consistency. Transfer to serving bowl. Garnish with walnuts and honey.
Mix together the eggs, sugar, vanilla, oil, and zucchini in a large bowl. In a separate bowl mix together the flour, soda, baking powder, and salt. Add to the zucchini batter and mix well. Stir in raisins, nuts, and pineapple until just blended. Pour into 2-9x5x3 inch loaf pans. Bake in a preheated 325 degree F (165 degrees C) for one hour, or until browned.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease bottom only of a 9x5 inch loaf pan, or three 6x3 inch loaf pans. Beat eggs in large bowl. Stir in sugar, melted butter, eggnog, rum extract, and vanilla. Combine the flour, baking powder, salt, and nutmeg. Stir into eggnog mixture, just enough to moisten dry ingredients. Pour batter into prepared pan or pans. Bake bread in large pan for 40 to 60 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean. Breads baked in the smaller pans require 25 to 40 minutes. Let cool in pan for 10 minutes, then turn out onto a wire rack, and cool completely. Wrap tightly, and store in the refrigerator.
Pour the milk and salt into a saucepan, and bring to a boil. Stir in the oats, maple syrup, raisins, and cranberries. Return to a boil, then reduce heat to medium. Cook for 5 minutes. Stir in walnuts and coconut, and let stand until it reaches your desired thickness. Spoon into serving bowls, and top with yogurt and honey, if desired.
Place the peach, mango, soy milk, and orange juice into a blender. Cover, and puree until smooth. Pour into glasses to serve.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Over medium-low heat melt butter in a large saucepan. Add onions and cook slowly, stirring occasionally, until onions are soft. In a small bowl, beat together eggs and cream. Stir in cheese. Spread onions in bottom of pastry shell. Pour egg mixture over onions. Bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes, or until eggs have set.
Spray a 9x13-inch casserole dish with cooking spray.
                                    Watch Now Spread ham into the bottom of prepared casserole dish. Butter one side of each bread slice; cut slices into cubes. Arrange buttered bread cubes atop ham; layer American cheese over bread cubes.
                                    Watch Now Whisk milk, eggs, mustard powder, and salt together in a bowl; pour over American cheese layer. Cover dish with aluminum foil and refrigerate 8 hours or overnight.
                                    Watch Now Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove aluminum foil from casserole. Bake in the preheated oven until cheese is melted and eggs are set in the middle, about 1 hour.
                                    Watch Now
Mix 2 tablespoons lemon juice and cornstarch together in a bowl until cornstarch dissolves. Stir blueberries and 3 tablespoons sugar in a saucepan over medium-high heat. Bring to a boil; reduce heat to low and simmer for 5 minutes. Pour cornstarch mixture into blueberry mixture; cook and stir until mixture thickens slightly. Cover saucepan and remove from heat. Whisk ricotta cheese, milk, eggs, sugar, juice from 1 lemon, lemon zest, nutmeg, and salt together in a bowl until well blended. Add flour and baking powder; whisk to combine. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or skillet over medium-high heat. Drop batter in 1/4 cup portions onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry. Flip and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter. Top pancakes with blueberry sauce.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Lightly grease a medium baking dish. In large bowl, mix the eggs, milk, croutons, cheese, onion, and parsley. Stir in the crabmeat. Season with salt and pepper. Spoon into the prepared baking dish, and sprinkle with Parmesan cheese. Bake 1 hour in the preheated oven, or until a knife inserted into center of the casserole comes out clean. Serve immediately.
Combine strawberries, blueberries, bananas, orange juice, yogurt, and soy milk powder in a blender. Blend until smooth, then pour into glasses and serve.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 9x13 inch baking dish with cooking spray. Pour the beaten eggs into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until they set and are no longer runny, 8 to 10 minutes. Remove, allow to cool, and cut into 6 portions. Butter the cut sides of the croissants and place one portion of the cooked egg onto each croissant bottom. Top each sandwich with two slices of ham and a slice of Colby-Jack cheese. Place the croissant tops on top of the sandwiches; wrap each sandwich well with plastic wrap. Place the sandwiches onto a baking sheet; freeze until solid, about 3 hours. Store frozen. To reheat, cook a wrapped sandwich in a microwave on High until hot in the center, 1 to 2 minutes.
Whisk together the wheat flour, egg whites, milk, salt, and oil in a large bowl until smooth. Lightly coat a skillet with cooking spray and place over medium heat.  Pour 1/4 cup of the batter into the skillet.  Tilt the pan in a circular motion to allow the batter to spread to the edges.  Cook until the bottom is light brown, about 2 minutes. Flip the crepe and place 2 tablespoons of the mixed berries in the center of the crepe; cook another 2 minutes.  Fold the crepe in half and remove with a spatula to a serving plate.  Dust with confectioners' sugar and serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 5x9-inch loaf pan. Mix brown sugar, vegetable oil, egg, buttermilk, flour, baking soda, salt, and rhubarb, in exact order and stirring after each addition, together in a bowl until batter is just combined; pour into the prepared pan. Combine white sugar, butter, and cinnamon together in a bowl until crumbly; lightly press onto batter. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of the bread comes out clean, about 1 hour.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease a baking sheet. Unroll each tube of crescent dough, but do not separate rectangles. Place side-by-side on prepared baking sheet with long sides touching; press and seal seams and perforations. Arrange ham lengthwise down center third of rectangle. Beat cream cheese and milk in a bowl. Separate one egg, placing egg white aside. Stir egg yolk, remaining eggs, salt, and pepper into cream cheese mixture; fold in red pepper and onion. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat; pour egg mixture into skillet and cook until just set, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat and spoon eggs over ham; sprinkle with Cheddar cheese. Cut 1-inch-wide strips towards the center to within 1/2-inch of filling on each long side of dough. Starting at one end, fold alternating strips at an angle across filling; pinch ends to seal and tuck under. Beat reserved egg white and brush over dough. Bake in preheated oven until golden, 25 to 28 minutes.
Whisk flour, white sugar, brown sugar, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl until no lumps remain. Pour milk, vegetable oil, and vanilla extract into the flour mixture; stir until just combined. Beat egg whites until foamy in a large glass or metal mixing bowl until soft peaks form. Lift your beater or whisk straight up: the egg whites will form soft mounds rather than a sharp peak. Fold the the beaten egg whites into the batter. Preheat a waffle iron and coat with cooking spray. Pour batter onto waffle iron in batches and cook until crisp and golden brown, about 2 minutes; repeat until all batter is used.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Prepare a 9x13 inch baking dish with the melted butter. Whisk together the eggs, pepperjack cheese, cottage cheese, flour, and salt in a large bowl. Pour the mixture into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are completely set, about 1 hour.
Place almonds in a small saucepan over low heat. Tossing frequently, toast until lightly browned, 5 to 10 minutes. Remove from heat, and set aside. In a large bowl, whisk together eggs, milk, flour, salt, baking powder, almond extract and vanilla extract. Soak bread slices in the mixture until saturated. Place slices in a shallow pan. Refrigerate slices approximately 1 hour. Heat canola oil and butter in a large skillet over medium heat. One at a time, press one side of soaked bread slices in the almonds to coat. Fry bread slices on both sides until golden brown. Dust with confectioner's sugar before serving,
Preheat oven to oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease one 12-cup muffin tin. In a medium bowl, combine spinach, ricotta cheese, sour cream, Parmesan cheese, and Cheddar cheese. In a small mixing bowl, beat eggs, milk, hot sauce, cumin, black pepper, parsley, and lemon pepper. Stir egg mixture into spinach mixture. Spoon mixture into the prepared muffin tin. Bake in preheated oven for 20 to 25 minutes. Let stand for 5 minutes. Remove from muffin cups. Serve warm.
Heat oven to 400 degrees F (205 degrees C). Grease a 10-inch glass pie plate. Place the bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Pat dry on paper towels and crumble the bacon. Sprinkle bacon, cheese, and onion in the pie plate. In a medium bowl, stir the milk, eggs, baking mix, and pepper with fork until blended. Pour into pie plate. Bake 35 to 40 minutes or until knife inserted in center comes out clean.
In a large bowl, combine eggs, oil, sugar, zucchini, and vanilla.  Mix well.  Add flours, baking powder, soda, salt, wheat germ, and cinnamon; stir to combine.  Stir in raisins and nuts, if desired. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 1 hour, or until a tester inserted in the center comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain and crumble. Spread into bottom of baking dish. Sprinkle with Cheddar cheese, Monterey Jack cheese, onion, chile peppers, and jalapeno pepper. In a medium bowl, mix eggs with chili powder, cumin, garlic powder, salt and pepper. Pour over contents of baking dish. Bake in preheated oven for 18 to 22 minutes, or until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean. Cool for 10 minutes, then cut into squares.
Combine egg, egg whites, Cheddar cheese, ham, bell pepper, salt, and ground pepper in a microwave-safe mug coated with non-stick spray. Microwave on high for 1 minute; stir. Return to microwave and cook until eggs are completely set, 1 to 1 1/2 minutes longer.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8x12 inch baking dish. Line the bottom of dish with green chiles. Sprinkle with 1/2 cup shredded cheese. Repeat layers twice more. In a medium bowl, whisk together milk and eggs. Season with salt and pepper. Pour egg mixture over chiles and cheese. Bake in preheated oven for 25 to 30 minutes, or until filling is set. Let stand 5 to 10 minutes before serving.
Melt 1 tablespoon butter in a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Pour in eggs, and cook to desired degree of doneness, stirring constantly. Preheat an oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Unroll crescent dough and place rolls on an ungreased 12 inch pizza pan with points toward the center. Press seams together and press up sides of pan to form a crust. Prepare Hollandaise sauce according to package directions using 2/3 cup milk and 1/4 cup butter. Pour evenly over crescent roll crust. Spread scrambled eggs evenly over sauce, then top with cubed ham. Sprinkle lightly with shredded cheese. Bake in preheated oven until bottom of crust is lightly browned, about 30 minutes.
To make the salsa, stir the tomatoes, green onions, cilantro, lime juice, jalapeno pepper, 1 clove minced garlic, and salt to taste, together in a bowl until well blended. Cover, and refrigerate until needed. Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease a baking sheet. Place 1 teaspoon canola oil in a skillet, and heat over medium heat. Stir in the garlic, and cook 1 minute until light brown. Mix in the black beans, chicken broth, and chiles; simmer until beans are heated through, about 5 minutes. Turn off heat, and keep warm. Place four tortillas on the prepared baking sheet. Sprinkle the cheese evenly over the tortillas. Top with the remaining four tortillas. Cover the baking sheet with aluminum foil. Bake tortillas in preheated oven until cheese melts, about 5 minutes. Place the remaining 1 teaspoon canola oil in a skillet, and heat over medium heat. Crack eggs into skillet, and cook to desired firmness. To assemble huevos rancheros, place filled tortillas on four serving plates. Top each tortilla with black bean mixture, a layer of salsa, and an egg. Serve immediately.
Saute mushrooms in 1 tablespoon of oil. Season with salt and set aside. Whisk half-and-half, eggs, salt and pepper until smooth. Spray a 9-by-13-inch Pyrex or ceramic baking dish with vegetable cooking spray. Line bottom with 6 slices of bread. Scatter half of the ham, and half of the mushrooms over the bread, then sprinkle with half of the scallions and cheese. Pour 1 cup of egg mixture over the top. Repeat layers with remaining bread, ham, mushrooms, cheese and scallions. Slowly pour remaining egg mixture evenly over top. Cover with plastic wrap, then weight down casserole with 3 16-ounce cans for at least 15 minutes to submerge ingredients. (Can be refrigerated overnight, but return to room temperature before baking.) Adjust oven rack to middle position. Bake in preheated 325-degree oven until custard is just set, about 50 minutes. Turn on broiler and broil until strata is spotty brown and puffy (watch carefully), about 5 minutes longer. Let stand for 8 to 10 minutes, then serve immediately.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease one 8x4 inch loaf pan and set aside. In a large bowl, sift together the flour, baking powder, and salt. Set aside. In another bowl, mash the bananas and stir in the eggs and sugar. Stir in the flour mixture and mix until just combined, then fold in the chopped nuts (optional). Pour the batter into the prepared pan. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 55 to 65 minutes or until bread tests done. Remove from oven and cool on a rack for 10 minute, then remove from pan and cool completely. Slice and serve.
In a medium bowl mix together flour, baking powder, and salt. In a separate bowl mix sugar, cream cheese, and eggs until light and fluffy. Mix mashed bananas and Chai into cream cheese mixture. Add flour mixture and mix until smooth. Pour mixture into a greased 9x5 inch loaf pan. Bake in a preheated 350 degree F(175 degrees C) oven for 60 minutes. Cool on rack. Remove from pan after 10 minutes.
Place ingredients in bread machine pan in the order suggested by the manufacturer. Select basic setting. Start. To bake bread in oven: select dough or manual cycle. Once cycle is complete, shape dough and place in a greased loaf pan. Allow to rise in a warm spot until doubled in size. Bake in a preheated 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) oven for 35 to 45 minutes or until a thermometer inserted in the center of the loaf reads 200 degrees F (95 degrees C).
Combine rice, soy milk, raisins, almonds, maple syrup, cinnamon, and cardamom in a saucepan; bring to a boil over medium-high heat. Reduce heat to low and simmer, stirring frequently to prevent scorching, until thickened, 5 to 8 minutes. Spoon into 4 bowls.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Bake pie crust in preheated oven until firm, about 8 minutes. Remove crust from oven and set aside. Reduce oven heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir onion, green bell pepper, mushrooms, and zucchini in hot oil until soft, 5 to 7 minutes. Remove vegetables from skillet and set aside. Sprinkle tomato slices with flour and basil; cook in the skillet for 1 minute per side. Whisk eggs, milk, salt, and pepper together in a small bowl. Spread 1 cup Colby-Monterey Jack cheese in the bottom of pie crust. Layer vegetable mixture over the cheese and top with the tomatoes. Pour egg mixture into pie shell. Sprinkle remaining 1/2 cup cheese atop the quiche. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted near the center comes out clean, 40 to 45 minutes. Cool 5 minutes before serving.
In a large bowl, stir together the whole wheat flour, oats, cornmeal, flaxseed meal, brown sugar, baking powder, and baking soda. Pour in buttermilk and egg.  Stir just until smooth. Heat a large skillet or griddle over medium heat. Coat with cooking spray. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels; reserving 2 tablespoons drippings in the skillet. Crumble bacon and set aside. Cook and stir onion and bell pepper over medium heat in reserved drippings until tender, about 5 minutes; remove with slotted spoon. Whisk eggs and milk in a large bowl. Fold hash browns, Cheddar cheese, salt, pepper, dill, onion mixture, and crumbled bacon into egg mixture; transfer to prepared baking dish. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted near the center comes out clean, 35 to 45 minutes.
Place the banana, kale, flax seed meal, and coconut oil into a blender, pour in the milk and orange juice. Cover, and puree until smooth; serve.
In a saucepan over medium heat, combine the milk, honey and cinnamon. As soon as it comes to a boil, stir in the couscous. Turn off the heat, cover and let stand for 5 minutes. Stir in the apricots, raisins and almonds.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a medium bowl, combine the eggs, milk, mayonnaise and cornstarch. Stir in the cheese, imitation crabmeat and pepper. Pour into the pie shell. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 35 to 40  minutes or until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean. Let cool slightly and serve.
Place ingredients in order suggested by your manufacturer. Select the sweet bread and light crust settings. Add raisins when indicated by your manufacturer.
Mix buttermilk and oats in a large bowl; allow to rest about 5 minutes. Stir flour, cornmeal, baking powder, sugar, baking soda, and salt into oat mixture. Add eggs and vegetable oil; mix until just combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle; cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 3 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 3 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Whisk flour, cocoa powder, sugar, and salt together in a large bowl.  Beat eggs, milk, and vanilla in another bowl; mix in the melted butter.  Pour the wet ingredients into the dry, and mix just until combined.  Stir in the chocolate chips. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or skillet over medium-high heat.  For each pancake, pour 1/4 cup batter on griddle and cook until bubbles pop in the center of the pancake, about 2 to 3 minutes.  Flip, and cook an additional minute on the opposite side.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Coat the inside of a 9-inch fluted tube pan (such as Bundt(R)) with cooking spray. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on paper towels; crumble and remove extra fat. Melt margarine in a small saucepan over medium heat; stir in brown sugar and maple syrup. Bring mixture to a boil; cook and stir until mixture begins to foam, about 1 minute. Remove saucepan from heat. Mix white sugar and cinnamon in a resealable plastic bag; add 6 to 8 biscuit pieces at a time and shake until well coated. Pour any remaining sugar-cinnamon mixture into brown sugar mixture. Place saucepan over medium heat and cook and stir until sugar dissolves, 2 to 3 minutes. Sprinkle 1/4 the bacon pieces in the bottom of the tube pan; pour in about 1/4 the brown sugar mixture. Arrange 1 layer of biscuit pieces in the tube pan; sprinkle in 1/4 the bacon pieces. Drizzle about 1/4 the brown sugar mixture over the biscuit pieces. Continue layering until all the ingredients are used, ending with a drizzle of brown sugar mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until biscuits are cooked through, about 35 minutes. Allow to cool in pan, 10 to 20 minutes; invert onto a serving plate.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 9x5-inch loaf pan with cooking spray. Whisk whole wheat flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a large bowl. Stir mashed bananas, peanut butter, brown sugar, yogurt, egg, and canola oil thoroughly in a separate bowl. Stir the banana mixture into the dry ingredients until thoroughly combined; stir in chocolate chips. Spoon batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until the loaf is lightly browned at the edges and a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 40 to 50 minutes. Cool the bread in the pan on a rack for 15 minutes before removing bread to finish cooling on rack. Slice when cool.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil.  Add potatoes and cook until tender but still firm, about 15 minutes. Drain, cool, peel and slice. Place eggs in a saucepan and cover with cold water. Bring water to a boil and immediately remove from heat. Cover and let eggs stand in hot water for 10 to 12 minutes. Remove from hot water, cool, peel and slice. In a 9x13 inch casserole dish layer potatoes and eggs, sprinkling each layer of eggs with seasoning salt, ending with potatoes. In a small saucepan over low heat, melt margarine with sour cream.  Pour over potatoes and sprinkle lightly with seasoning salt. Bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes.
In a medium bowl, stir together the whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour, oats, cornmeal, sweetener, salt, baking powder, baking soda and cinnamon. In a separate bowl, whisk together the eggs, yogurt, milk and water. Pour the wet ingredients into the dry, and mix just until moistened. Heat a skillet over medium heat, and coat with cooking spray. Pour about 1/3 cup of batter per pancake onto the skillet. Cook until bubbles begin to form in the center, then flip and cook until browned on the other side.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir the sausage in the hot skillet until crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink. Drain and discard any excess grease. Grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Spread the bread cubes into the prepared dish; sprinkle the browned sausage and Cheddar cheese overtop. Beat the eggs in a mixing bowl until smooth; add the salt, mustard powder, and 2 cups of milk and whisk until evenly blended. Pour the egg mixture over the bread cubes. Cover and refrigerate overnight. Preheat an oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Whisk together the cream of mushroom soup and 1/2 cup milk; pour over the casserole. Bake in the preheated oven until firm and golden brown, about 1 1/2 hours.
In a small saucepan over medium heat, combine the milk, sugar and butter. Heat until slightly warm to the touch then remove from heat and stir in the yeast. Let stand until foamy, about 10 minutes. In a large bowl, stir together the flour and salt. Mix in the eggs, oil and the yeast mixture. Mix until dough pulls away from the sides of the bowl. Turn dough out onto a floured surface and continue to knead until the dough is smooth and elastic, about 10 minutes. Grease a large bowl with 1 tablespoon of oil. Place the dough into the bowl and turn once to coat. Cover and let stand in a warm place until double in size, about 1 hour. Use remaining oil to grease a cookie sheet or 9x13 inch pan. For plain rolls, punch down dough and divide into 12 equal pieces. Roll the pieces into balls and place them into the greased pan side by side. Let dough rise for 20 to 25 minutes, or until almost double. Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake for 20 to 25 minutes in the preheated oven, until rolls are golden brown.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Bake pie crust in preheated oven for 10 to 12 minutes. Place broccoli in a steamer over 1 inch of boiling water, and cover. Cook until tender but still firm, about 2 to 6 minutes. Drain. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Saute onion and garlic until golden. Stir in the cooked broccoli and heat through. In a blender, combine tofu, soy milk, mustard, salt, nutmeg, ground red pepper, black pepper, parsley and  Parmesan soy cheese; process until smooth. In a large bowl combine tofu mixture with broccoli mixture. Pour into pie crust. Bake in preheated oven until quiche is set, 35 to 40 minutes. Allow to stand for at least 5 minutes before cutting.
Place the banana pieces, strawberries, blueberries, milk, vanilla extract, yogurt, and ice cubes in a blender.  Blend until smooth.
Fry the bacon in a large skillet over medium heat until crisp. Remove from the pan, and set on paper towels to drain. Crack the eggs into the pan with the bacon grease so that they are about 1 inch apart. Season with salt and pepper. When the eggs look firm, flip them over, and cook on the other side to your desired doneness. Transfer to a plate and serve with bacon.
Place the banana, strawberries, kiwi, vanilla frozen yogurt, and pineapple and orange juice blend in a blender. Blend until smooth.
Heat a lightly oiled skillet or griddle over medium heat. In a bowl, mix the flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt. Make a well in the center, and pour in the eggnog, butter, and egg. Mix until dry ingredients are evenly moist. Pour 1/4 cup batter onto the hot griddle for each pancake. Cook pancakes until bubbly on top. Flip with a spatula, and continue cooking until lightly browned on bottom.
In a large bowl, stir together wheat flour, buckwheat flour, all-purpose flour, oats, and baking powder. Stir in milk, oil, honey, and egg. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides, and serve hot.
Grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Layer half of the torn bread in the bottom of the dish. Sprinkle the mushrooms and green bell pepper evenly over the bread layer. Sprinkle with half of the cheese. Top with remaining bread pieces, then layer with the onion and ham. Sprinkle with remaining cheese. Whisk together eggs and milk; pour over the entire pan. Cover with aluminum foil, and refrigerate for 12 to 24 hours. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake covered for 35 minutes, then remove foil and bake for an additional 15 minutes, or until top is evenly brown.
Preheat waffle iron. Combine almond flour, salt, and baking soda in a large bowl. In a separate bowl, whisk together the eggs, honey, and vanilla. Stir the flour mixture into the egg mixture. Grease preheated waffle iron with cooking spray. Spoon batter onto hot waffle iron. Cook until golden; serve hot.
Combine all of the dry ingredients.  Beat eggs with oil and add to flour mixture.  Add mangoes, lemon and raisins. Pour into 2 greased 8 x 4 loaf pans.  Bake at 350 degrees F -175 degrees C  (325 degrees F for glass pans) for about 60 minutes or until toothpick comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a baking sheet, or line with parchment paper. In a large bowl, stir together the flour, sugar, baking soda, baking powder, and salt. In another bowl, whisk together eggs, buttermilk, and corn oil. Make a well in the center of the flour mixture, and pour in the buttermilk mixture. Add the raisins, and stir a few times, just until the ingredients come together into a soft dough. Turn the dough out onto a floured surface, and with floured hands shape dough into a ball. Place the dough on the prepared baking sheet, and cut a large cross in the top with a sharp knife. Place the bread on a middle rack of the preheated oven, and bake until golden brown, 30 to 40 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Spray 8 muffin cups with cooking spray. In a bowl, stir together 1 tablespoon of cinnamon and the white sugar until evenly blended. Remove the biscuits from the packages, and cut into quarters. Drop a few biscuit pieces at a time into the sugar mixture, and coat thoroughly. Distribute the coated biscuit pieces among the prepared muffin tins (4 to 5 pieces per cup). Place butter, brown sugar, and the remaining 1 tablespoon cinnamon in a microwave-safe glass or ceramic bowl, and microwave a few seconds until the butter has melted. Stir to blend, and drizzle about 2 tablespoons of the butter mixture over each cup. Bake in the preheated oven until the tops of the muffins are crispy and brown, about 20 minutes. Allow to cool for about 10 minutes before removing from pan.
Heat olive oil in a small pan over medium heat. Cook and stir eggs until eggs are set, 3 to 5 minutes. Place black beans in a microwave-safe bowl. Heat on High in the microwave until warm, about 1 minute. Divide warmed black beans between two bowls. Top each bowl with scrambled eggs, avocado, and salsa. Season with salt and black pepper.
Heat a non-stick skillet over medium heat. Place bell pepper ring in the hot skillet. Crack egg into bell pepper ring; cook until bottom holds together and corners are browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook until desired doneness is reached, 2 to 3 minutes more; season with salt and ground black pepper.
Preheat oven to 250 degrees F (120 degrees C). Puree the bananas and dates in a food processor. Add the brown sugar, hot water, vanilla and cinnamon; mix well. Pour mixture into a large mixing bowl, add oatmeal and mix well. Spread onto large baking sheets and bake at 250 degrees F (120 degrees C) for 1 to 1 1/2 hours stirring frequently. Cook longer for crunchier if desired.  Once cooled add the dried fruits and nuts, as little or as much as you want, and mix.
Bring a medium pot of salted water to a boil.  Add potato and cook until tender but still firm, about 15 minutes. Drain, cool, peel and slice. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Beat together eggs, salt, pepper and parsley. In a cast iron skillet, heat olive oil over medium-high heat. Saute onion and red pepper until soft, then stir in mushrooms. When mushrooms start to shrink, add the chopped ham, potato and tomato slices. Pour in the egg mixture; gently stir to combine. Sprinkle cheese on top of eggs and place skillet in preheated oven. Bake until eggs are firm, about 10 to 15 minutes. Allow to cool briefly before serving.
Preheat an oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Cook the sausage and onion in an oven-proof skillet over medium heat until the sausage has browned, about 10 minutes. Drain excess grease from the skillet. Whisk together the eggs, milk, sour cream, salt, and pepper. Sprinkle the sausage with 1 cup of the Cheddar cheese, then pour the egg mixture overtop. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, about 18 minutes. Sprinkle with the remaining Cheddar cheese, and return to the oven until the cheese has melted. Cut into wedges to serve.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Cook bacon in a large skillet over medium heat until evenly brown and crisp.  Drain on paper towels, crumble and set aside. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.  Add onions; cook and stir until translucent.  Reduce the heat to medium and add the portobello mushrooms.  Continue cooking until the mushrooms are tender.  Set aside. Bring a saucepan of salted water to a boil over high heat.  Cook asparagus in boiling water until just tender, 1 to 2 minutes.  Immediately drain and run under cold water to cool. Brush the pie shell with the beaten egg white, if using.  Place the onion and mushroom mixture, asparagus, and bacon into the bottom of the pie shell.   Sprinkle the Cheddar and feta cheeses over the vegetables.  In a small bowl, whisk together the eggs, cream, salt, and pepper until smooth.  Pour this mixture over the vegetable and cheese filling. Bake uncovered for 35 to 40 minutes, or until firm and lightly browned on top.  Let cool to room temperature before serving.
Blend eggs, milk, warm water, white sugar, flour, and salt together in a large mixing bowl with an electric mixer until well combined into a smooth batter. Stream the melted butter into the batter while continuing to beat. Heat a skillet or crepe pan over medium heat. Coat the cooking surface with a thin layer of butter. Pour a thin layer of batter onto the prepared cooking surface; swirl the pan to assure even coverage. Cook the crepe until browned on the bottom, 1 to 2 minutes; flip the crepe and continue cooking until the other side is browned. Serve immediately.
Lightly grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Heat the brown sugar, butter, and corn syrup in a small saucepan over medium heat. Cook and stir until the mixture begins to boil; remove the mixture from heat, and pour into the prepared baking dish. Place the bread slices atop the brown sugar mixture. Whisk the eggs and eggnog together in a large bowl; pour over the bread slices. Cover the baking dish with aluminum foil, and refrigerate 8 hours to overnight. Preheat an oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Remove the baking dish from the refrigerator. Bake in the preheated oven for 35 minutes. Increase heat to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C), remove the aluminum foil, and continue baking until the the top begins to brown, 5 to 7 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Press the pie crust ito a 9-inch pie plate; set aside. Place broccoli in a glass bowl. Cover bowl with plastic wrap. Cook broccoli in microwave in 1-minute intervals until evenly heated through, about 5 minutes total; set aside. Melt butter in a large saucepan over medium heat. Saute onion and garlic in melted butter until slightly translucent, about 5 minutes. Stir ham and broccoli into the onion mixture and transfer to the pie crust. Beat Cheddar cheese, milk, eggs, and black pepper together in a bowl; pour over the ham mixture. Sprinkle paprika over the entire quiche. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center of the quiche comes out clean, 30 to 45 minutes.
Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Pour beaten eggs into the skillet; let cook undisturbed until the bottom of the eggs begin to firm, 1 to 2 minutes. Stir cottage cheese and chives into eggs and season with black pepper. Cook and stir until eggs are nearly set, 3 to 4 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Place sausage in a large skillet and pour in about 1/4 inch of water; cook sausage over medium heat until water evaporates and sausages are evenly browned, 10 to 15 minutes. Crumble cooked sausages into a bowl. Mix sweet potatoes and butter together in a bowl; evenly spread into the bottom of the prepared 9x13-inch dish. Stir Cheddar-mozzarella cheese blend, onion, spinach, cottage cheese, eggs, and crumbled sausage together in a large bowl; spoon over sweet potato layer. Bake casserole in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean and eggs are set, about 1 hour. Cool 5 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Heat butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Saute onion until soft. Add sausage, and cook until evenly brown. Drain, crumble, and set aside. In a medium bowl, whisk together eggs, Ranch dressing and milk. Stir in shredded cheese. Season with hot sauce, salt, pepper and sugar. Spread sausage mixture in the bottom of crust. Cover with egg mixture, and shake lightly to remove air, and to level contents. Bake in preheated oven for 15 to 20 minutes. Reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C), and bake 45 to 50 minutes, or until filling is puffed and golden brown. Remove from oven, prick top with a knife, and let cool 10 minutes before serving.
In a large bowl, mix all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, salt, baking powder and sugar. Stir in buttermilk and bananas just until moistened. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
In a large bowl, mix together flour, baking soda, salt, sugar and baking powder. Add the sourdough starter, oil, eggs and milk; beat well. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Press pie pasty into the bottom of a 9-inch pie plate. Bake pie crust in preheated oven for 5 minutes, use a fork to poke holes into the crust, and continue cooking until lightly browned, about 5 minutes more. Reduce oven heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Mix 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese, Swiss cheese, and 1 tablespoon flour in a bowl; spread over the warm pie crust. Stir ham and honey mustard together in a bowl to coat the ham completely; spoon over the cheese mixture. Mix half-and-half, eggs, green onions, 1 tablespoon flour, and salt together in bowl. Pour mixture carefully over the ham layer; top with remaining Cheddar cheese. Bake in preheated oven until set in the center, 40 to 50 minutes. Cool for 10 minutes before cutting.
In a large skillet, melt butter over medium high heat. Add potatoes, onion and green pepper; saute until potatoes are browned. Stir in eggs and cook until eggs are set. Serve warm.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Spread pesto evenly in the bottom of the pie crust. Sprinkle goat cheese over pesto. In a large bowl, beat together eggs, half-and-half cream, and flour. Season with salt and pepper. Pour over goat cheese in pie crust. Arrange sun-dried tomatoes on top. Bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes, or until done.
Combine flour, powdered milk, sugar, baking powder, and salt in a large bowl; stir to blend. Store mixture in an airtight container and use within 8 months.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Place the bananas into a large plastic zipper bag, seal the bag, and smoosh the bananas with your fingers until very well mashed. Set the bananas aside. Place the brown sugar and butter into a mixing bowl, and mix on medium speed with an electric mixer until light and fluffy, 1 to 2 minutes. Cut a corner from the plastic bag, and squeeze the mashed bananas into the bowl of brown sugar mixture. With the electric mixer on medium speed, beat in the bananas, egg, cinnamon, vanilla extract, and milk until the mixture is well combined. Switch the mixer to low speed, and gradually beat in the flour, baking soda, baking powder, and kosher salt just until the batter is smooth, about 1 minute. Spread the batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until the bread is set and lightly browned on top, about 40 minutes. A toothpick inserted into the center of the loaf should come out clean.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Place each avocado half in a ramekin. Crack 1 egg into each avocado half; season with salt, black pepper, and cayenne pepper. Place ramekins on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until entire egg is cooked through, about 15 minutes. Sprinkle each avocado with bacon and chives.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bring the pie crust to room temperature. Heat the olive oil in a skillet over medium heat; add the onion and cook until onion becomes transparent, about 5  minutes. Combine the spinach with the onion, cover the skillet; turn off the heat, and set aside. Unroll the crust and press to fit into a 9 inch pie plate. Trim the edges. Beat the eggs in a large bowl until light colored and frothy. Add the garlic, thyme, basil, cheeses, and spinach mixture, and stir until well blended. Season to taste with salt and pepper. Pour the spinach mixture into the prepared pie crust. Bake in preheated oven until the top is golden brown, and an inserted tooth pick comes out clean, about 50 minutes.
Brew your espresso. Meanwhile, in a small saucepan, whisk together the pumpkin, vanilla, sugar, pumpkin pie spice and milk. Warm over medium heat, whisking constantly, until hot and frothy. Do not  bring to a boil. Pour the espresso into a mug and pour the pumpkin spiced milk over it.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Prick the pie crust all over with fork and bake for 5 minutes. Place the frozen spinach in microwave safe bowl and cook until thawed.  Drain as much of the liquid as you can and then use paper towels to get the spinach as dry as possible. Beat together the eggs, yogurt or sour cream, flour, and pepper until well mixed.  Stir in the spinach.  Layer the sliced mushrooms, cheese, and chopped scallions in that order on the bottom of the pie crust.  Top with the spinach mixture. Bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes and then decrease temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and bake for 30 additional minutes. Let cool before serving.
In a large mixing bowl, blend soy milk, water, 1/4 cup margarine, sugar, syrup, flour, and salt. Cover and chill the mixture for 2 hours. Lightly grease a 5 to 6 inch skillet with some soy margarine. Heat the skillet until hot. Pour approximately 3 tablespoons batter into the skillet.  Swirl to make the batter cover the skillet's bottom.  Cook until golden, flip and cook on opposite side.
Combine the milk and cream in a saucepan, and whisk over high heat until hot and frothy. Remove from heat and stir in the vanilla and sugar. Whisk together hot espresso and white chocolate chips in a mug until smooth. If you are making two, pour half into another mug. Top with the frothy hot milk and stir to blend in the flavoring.
Combine oats, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt in a bowl. Set aside. Mix honey, egg whites, milk, coconut oil, vanilla extract in a separately bowl. Stir the oat mixture into the egg mixture and mix well. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and top with blueberries. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter.
Position oven rack to center position. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Butter a 10-inch pie plate. Heat a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir bacon in the hot skillet until crisp, 5 to 10 minutes. Remove bacon and drain all but 2 tablespoons grease from skillet. Cook and stir asparagus and mushrooms in the remaining bacon grease until asparagus is tender, about 5 minutes. Remove skillet from heat and toss bacon into asparagus mixture. Spread asparagus-bacon mixture into the prepared pie pan. Sprinkle Swiss cheese over mixture. Whisk cream, eggs, salt, and pepper in a bowl. Pour egg mixture over asparagus-cheese mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until quiche is set and a knife inserted in the center comes out clean, about 30 minutes.
Whisk water and baking soda together in a mixing bowl. Add ricotta cheese, lemon zest, vegetables oil, sugar, egg, and vanilla. Whisk until smooth, breaking up lumps of cheese as you mix. Add melted butter, lemon juice, and 1 cup plus 2 tablespoons self-rising flour. Whisk together, stirring until most of flour disappears into the batter. Let batter sit at room temperature about 15 minutes. Heat lightly greased cast iron skillet or griddle over medium-high heat. Portion out 1/4 cup scoops of batter onto skillet (cook in batches). When bubbles begin to form on the surface and the edges of the pancakes start to look dry (2 to 3 minutes), flip and cook other side until cooked through, 2 to 3 minutes. Transfer to a warm plate.
Crack eggs into a mixing bowl. Add 1/4 teaspoon water. Whisk together until just beaten (do not overmix). Drizzle olive oil into 8-inch nonstick skillet. Brush evenly over the bottom of the pan. Evenly grate cheese into the skillet approximately 1/2-inch deep (or just shy of 1 ounce). Place pan over medium-high heat. Cheese will slowly start to melt. When cheese starts to bubble and turn golden brown, about 4 minutes, pour eggs evenly over cheese. Reduce heat to low. Sprinkle with salt, pepper, and cayenne. Cover and let eggs cook on low until they are set, checking after the first 30 seconds. For 2 eggs, this should take about 1 minute, total cooking time. Remove pan from heat. Carefully use a spatula to fold "parmalet" in half. Transfer to serving plate.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat and stir in sausage. Cook and stir until sausage is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink, about 10 minutes. Drain and discard any excess grease. Lightly grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Spread butter on the inside of each English muffin half. Arrange buttered English muffins in the prepared baking dish; top with half the sausage, half the Cheddar cheese, and half the mozzarella cheese. Whisk eggs, sour cream, and green chilies together in a large bowl; pour evenly over sausage and cheese layer. Top with remaining sausage, Cheddar cheese, and mozzarella cheese. Cover and chill for 8 hours. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake strata in the preheated oven until lightly browned and set in the middle, about 35 minutes. Let stand for 10 minutes before serving.
Fill a large saucepan with 2 to 3 inches of water and bring to a boil over high heat. Reduce the heat to medium-low, pour in the vinegar and 2 teaspoons of salt, and keep the water at a gentle simmer. While waiting for the water to simmer, place a slice of mozzarella cheese and a thick slice of tomato onto each English muffin half, and toast in a toaster oven until the cheese softens and the English muffin has toasted, about 5 minutes. Crack an egg into a small bowl.  Holding the bowl just above the surface of the water, gently slip the egg into the simmering water. Repeat with the remaining eggs. Poach the eggs until the whites are firm and the yolks have thickened but are not hard, 2 1/2 to 3 minutes. Remove the eggs from the water with a slotted spoon, and dab on a kitchen towel to remove excess water. To assemble, place a poached egg on top of each English muffin. Spoon a teaspoon of pesto sauce onto each egg and sprinkle with salt to taste.
Spread 1/4 cup of chocolate hazelnut spread onto each crepe. Arrange 1 sliced banana down the center of each one. Roll up, and place in a warm skillet over medium heat. Let them warm up for about 90 seconds. Transfer to plates, and serve topped with whipped cream.
In a blender, combine frozen fruit, canned fruit and honey. Blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place biscuits 2 inches apart on an ungreased cookie sheet. Bake in preheated oven for 8 to 11 minutes or until golden brown. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain and set aside. In a large bowl, beat together eggs and milk. Heat a lightly oiled skillet over medium heat. Scramble eggs to your liking. Cut open biscuits, lightly butter, layer with eggs, bacon, and cheese.
Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain and chop into bite-size pieces; set aside. While sausage is cooking, beat eggs and milk together. Pour eggs into griddle. Add cheese and cook until eggs are set. Stir in sausage and serve warm.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a large bowl, combine the potatoes, rosemary, oil, salt and pepper. Toss well to coat. Spread evenly onto cookie sheet and bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes.
Spray the crock of a slow cooker with cooking spray. Spread hash browns to cover the bottom of the slow cooker crock. Whisk eggs, milk, mustard, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Spread sausage over hash browns and spread Cheddar cheese over sausage. Pour egg mixture over cheese. Cook on Low for 6 to 8 hours.
Beat together milk, eggs, sugar, cocoa powder, baking powder, and salt. Heat a lightly buttered skillet or griddle over medium heat. Dip each slice of bread into egg mixture until well soaked, about 20 seconds per side.  Place in pan, and cook on both sides until they are no longer gooey or shiny in the middle when cut in half, about 3 to 4 minutes per side.
Beat the eggs, pumpkin puree, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a bowl. Dip the bread slices into the pumpkin mixture until coated on both sides. Melt 1 teaspoon of butter in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Place 4 of the bread slices into the skillet and cook until browned on both sides, about 3 minutes per side. Repeat with the remaining bread and butter.
Preheat an oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Place 8 ounces of cubed Cheddar cheese, onion, eggs, and evaporated milk into a blender. Season with salt, pepper, garlic powder, parsley, and sage, then blend until smooth. Spread salmon over the pie crust. Sprinkle 1/4 cup of shredded Cheddar cheese then pour the egg mixture on top. Top with the remaining 1/4 cup of shredded Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 30 minutes.
Combine light corn syrup, butter and sugar in saucepan; simmer until syrup-like. Pour mixture over the bottom of a 9"x 13" pan. Slice bread into 12-16 slices; place over the syrup. Layer as needed. Beat together the eggs, milk, vanilla, and salt. Pour over bread. Cover with saran wrap. Refrigerate overnight. Bake in a preheated oven 350 degree F (175 degrees C) for 45 minutes. Cut into squares. Invert and serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat, and cook the onion until tender. Mix in the garlic, spinach, and carrots, and cook until the spinach liquid has evaporated. Remove skillet from heat, and mix in cheese and eggs. Season with red pepper, nutmeg, salt, and pepper. Pour 1/2 the mixture into each pie shell. Bake 30 minutes in the preheated oven, until a toothpick inserted in the center of a quiche comes out clean.
Heat a saucepan over medium heat and measure in the quinoa. Season with cinnamon and cook until toasted, stirring frequently, about 3 minutes. Pour in the almond milk, water and vanilla and stir in the brown sugar and salt. Bring to a boil, then cook over low heat until the porridge is thick and grains are tender, about 25 minutes. Add more water if needed if the liquid has dried up before it finishes cooking. Stir occasionally, especially at the end, to prevent burning.
Stir water and quinoa together in a rice cooker; cook until quinoa is tender, about 15 minutes. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat and cook eggs to desired doneness; season with seasoned salt and pepper. Combine quinoa and eggs in a bowl; top with avocado and feta cheese.
In a blender, combine the bananas, ice cubes, milk and sugar. Cover, and blend for 2 minutes, or until ice is finely crushed.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees F). Grease and flour a 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a medium bowl, combine the dates and butter. Pour boiling water over them, and let stand until cool. When the dates have cooled, stir the mixture to break up any clumps. Mix in the brown sugar and egg until well blended. Combine the flour, baking soda, baking powder, and salt; stir into the date mixture until just blended. Stir in walnuts. Pour into the prepared pan. Bake for 50 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a wooden pick inserted into the center comes out clean.
In a large bowl, combine the sourdough starter, egg, water, and oil. In a separate bowl, combine the nonfat dry milk, salt, baking soda, and sugar. Stir to blend dry ingredients. Add to sourdough starter and mix until batter is smooth. Bake on a greased 350 degree F(175 degree C) griddle until golden brown on the bottom. Flip and bake on opposite side.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x9-inch baking pan. In a mixing bowl, beat together the peanut butter, brown sugar, and butter with an electric mixer until smooth and fluffy. Beat in the egg and vanilla extract, then the banana. Stir in the oats, flour, wheat germ, and baking soda until completely combined. Spread in prepared baking pan. Bake in the preheated oven until set and lightly browned, 20 to 25 minutes. Remove from oven and cool in pan on wire rack before cutting into bars.
In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, cinnamon, nutmeg, ginger, and cloves. Melt about 1 tablespoon of butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Dip slices of bread one at a time into the egg, quickly coating each side but not fully saturating the bread. Fry a few slices at a time in the buttered skillet until golden brown on each side. Add more butter to the skillet and continue with remaining slices.  Melt remaining butter in the microwave at 15 second intervals. Place finished toast onto plates, drizzle with melted butter, and dust with confectioners' sugar.
Combine the banana, mango, yogurt, and juice in a blender; blend until nearly smooth.
Mix cream cheese, confectioners' sugar, 2 tablespoon milk, and 1 teaspoon vanilla extract in a bowl until smooth and creamy; fold in 1 cup blueberries. Cover the bottom of a 10x14-inch baking dish with 1 layer bread cubes. Spread cream cheese mixture over bread layer; top with remaining bread cubes. Whisk 2 cups milk, eggs, 2 teaspoons vanilla extract, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a large bowl; pour over bread mixture. Sprinkle 1 cup blueberries over bread-egg mixture. Cover dish tightly with aluminum foil and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Remove from refrigerator 30 to 60 minutes before baking. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven for 45 minutes. Remove foil and continue baking until center is set, about 30 minutes.
Mix the brown sugar, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a bowl. Add the apples and cranberries, tossing to coat evenly with the sugar mixture. Pour into a slow cooker. Top with butter pieces. Mix the oatmeal together with the water, apple juice, cranberry juice, and salt in a bowl, and pour over the apple mixture in the slow cooker. Do not stir. Cover, and cook on Low for 8 hours. Stir before serving. Spoon into bowls and top with candied walnuts, if desired.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease and flour two 9 x 5 inch loaf pans. Mix together sugars, oil, and eggs.  Mix in pumpkin.  Add flour, salt, soda, and spices, and then water.  Stir together until just moistened.  Stir in coconut and nuts.  Pour batter into prepared pans. Bake for 60 minutes, or until tester inserted in the center comes out clean.
Whisk together the eggs, milk, and salt in a large bowl. Heat butter in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Pour in the egg mixture; cook and stir until eggs are completely set, about 5 minutes. Chop the cooked eggs and place in a large bowl. Set aside. Heat a large skillet over medium heat and stir in the sausage and garlic. Cook and stir for 5 minutes, then add the onion. Continue cooking and stirring until the sausage is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink. Drain and discard any excess grease. Combine the sausage with the eggs, tomato, cilantro, jalapeno, and taco seasoning. Allow mixture to cool to room temperature, then stir in the Cheddar cheese. Place a tortilla onto your work surface, then spoon some of the filling halfway between the bottom edge and the center of the tortilla. Flatten the filling into rectangle shape with the back of a spoon. Fold the bottom of the tortilla snugly over the filling, then fold in the left and right edges.  Roll the burrito up to the top edge, forming a tight cylinder. Repeat with the remaining ingredients. Tightly wrap individual burritos with plastic wrap and freeze until ready to serve. Heat in the microwave until hot, 3 to 4 minutes, before serving.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir the shredded potato and onion in the hot oil until the potatoes begin to brown, about 5 minutes.. Season with salt and pepper. Add the asparagus and ham and continue cooking until the asparagus is tender, another 5 to 7 minutes; transfer to the prepared baking dish. Whisk the eggs and milk together in a small bowl; pour evenly over the dish. Scatter the mozzarella and white Cheddar cheeses over the top of the potato mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until set in the middle, 20 to 25 minutes. Garnish with the basil to serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8x8-inch baking dish. Mix oats, brown sugar, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Beat in milk, butter, maple syrup, eggs, and vanilla extract; fold in cranberries. Spread mixture into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until bubbling, about 40 minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Spray waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray or brush with oil. Whisk flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl. Beat eggs in a large bowl until light and fluffy. Stir flour mixture into eggs, one third at a time, alternating with buttermilk, until just combined; stir in butter. Pour batter into preheated waffle iron; cook until golden brown, about 3 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). In a medium bowl, stir together the flour, salt and sugar. Pour in milk, eggs and cream, and stir into a smooth batter. Meanwhile, melt margarine in a cast iron skillet. Pour the batter over the melted margarine. Place the skillet in the oven, and bake for 35 minutes. The pancake will rise to form a bubble in the middle. Remove from the oven, and let cool until the pancake sets, or goes down. Cut into pieces, serve with maple syrup and enjoy!
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Brown hash browns and ham in 1 tablespoon of oil in a medium skillet over medium high heat. Stir in diced green chilies and 1/2 cup of Cheddar cheese. Cook until cheese has melted. Coat the bottom of a 9x13 inch baking dish with a small amount of enchilada sauce. Dip each tortilla in remaining sauce, and fill with potato-ham mixture. Roll each as tightly as possible and place in the baking dish, seam side down. Top with remaining sauce and cheese, and cover with tin foil. Bake, covered, in the preheated oven for approximately 20 minutes. Remove foil and bake for another 10 minutes, or until lightly browned on top. Serve immediately.
Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat. In a small bowl, combine egg, Cheddar cheese, salt and pepper. Pour into pan, and cook stirring for 3 to 5 minutes, or until desired doneness. Remove from heat, and stir in pesto.
In a ceramic or glass mug, combine the milk, honey and vanilla. Microwave on HIGH for about 1 1/2 minutes. Stir.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly spray a cast iron or other ovenproof skillet with cooking spray and then heat over medium heat. Spread mashed banana on top of 4 slices of bread. Place remaining four slices on top. In a bowl, whisk together milk, eggs, vanilla and cinnamon. Dip bread in egg mixture for 45 seconds on each side then place in skillet. Cook bread for two minutes on each side. Place bread on an ungreased baking sheet and bake in preheated oven for 8 minutes, until golden. Serve warm.
Whisk together flour, baking soda, salt, cinnamon, and baking powder. In a large bowl, beat the eggs.  Gradually beat in sugar, then oil.  Add flour mixture alternately with zucchini  into the egg mixture.  Stir in the raisins, walnuts, and vanilla.  Pour batter into two 9 x 5 inch greased and lightly floured loaf pans. Bake on lowest rack of the oven at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 55 minutes.  Let cool for 10 minutes in the pan, then turn out onto racks to cool completely.  To freeze, wrap loaves in plastic wrap, and then wrap in heavy freezer paper.   Will keep indefinitely.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a medium baking dish. Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, and set aside. In a medium bowl, mix corn bread mix, cream style corn and water. Cover the bottom of the prepared baking dish with about 1/2 inch of the corn bread mixture. Layer mixture with sausage, followed by onion and jalapeno. Cover with cheese. Top with remaining corn bread mixture, using only as much as will fit in the baking dish. Cook 35 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean. Allow to cool slightly before serving.
Whisk together the eggs, cream, cayenne pepper, 1 tablespoon salt, and black pepper in a large bowl.  In a paper bag, shake together the flour, cornstarch, and 1 tablespoon salt. Dip the chicken into the beaten egg mixture, then place into the flour mixture and shake to coat.  Place the breaded chicken onto a wire rack; do not stack. Let the chicken rest for 20 minutes to allow the coating to set. Heat about 3 inches of oil in a deep-fryer or large saucepan to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). In small batches, fry chicken 5 to 8 minutes until golden brown. Remove chicken, and drain on paper towels. Set aside or keep warm in a a low oven. Combine the mayonnaise, maple syrup, horseradish, and mustard powder in a medium bowl. Place the bacon in a large, deep skillet, and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on a paper towel-lined plate. To assemble the sandwiches: Place 4 waffles on a cookie sheet, top each waffle with 2 chicken tenders, 3 slices of bacon, and 2 slices of Cheddar.  Broil the sandwich for a 3 to 5 minutes until the cheese melts.  Spread 3 tablespoons of the maple mayonnaise on the remaining 4 waffles and place on top of the sandwich.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Whisk together the cornmeal, buttermilk, vegetable oil, and egg in a bowl to form a batter. Melt the butter in a cast-iron skillet over medium heat, and swirl the melted butter all over the bottom and up the sides of the skillet. Let the butter heat until it gives off a faint toasted fragrance; pour the batter into the hot skillet. Place the skillet into the preheated oven, and bake until golden brown, 25 to 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 10-inch pie dish. Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir sliced mushrooms until tender, about 5 minutes. Drain excess liquid, if necessary; set mushrooms aside. Place sour cream, eggs, Parmesan cheese, flour, cream, onion powder, garlic powder, salt, and hot pepper sauce in a blender; blend until smooth, 30 seconds to 1 minute. Pour egg mixture into a large bowl. Stir mushrooms, spinach, and Cheddar cheese into egg mixture. Pour into prepared pie dish. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned and a toothpick inserted into the middle of the quiche comes out clean, about 45 minutes.
In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, sugar, and salt. Sift the flour into the bowl, and stir in along with the milk. Mix until smooth and well blended. The batter should be thin. Heat a griddle or skillet over medium heat. Lightly oil the pan or spray with cooking spray.  Pour about 2 tablespoons of the batter, or as much as desired, into the pan. Tilt the pan to spread the batter out evenly. When the edges are crisp looking and the center appears dry, slide a spatula carefully under the blin. Flip, and cook for about 1 minute on the other side, or until lightly browned. Remove blini to a plate. Put a little butter on top, and continue to stack the blini on top of each other. To serve, spread with desired filling, then fold in half, and in half again to form a triangle. Mmm Mmm!
Heat oven to 400 degrees F. Grease rectangular baking dish, 13x9x2 inches. Cook sausage, bell pepper and onion in 10-inch skillet over medium heat, stirring occasionally, until sausage is no longer pink; drain. Stir together sausage mixture, potatoes and 1 1/2 cups of the cheese in baking dish. Stir Bisquick mix, milk, pepper and eggs until blended. Pour into baking dish. Bake uncovered 40 to 45 minutes or until knife inserted in center comes out clean. Sprinkle with remaining cheese. Bake 1 to 2 minutes longer or just until cheese is melted. Cool 5 minutes.
Fry the bacon in a large deep skillet over medium-high heat until evenly browned and crisp. Remove from the pan, and add the potatoes and onions to the bacon drippings. Season with garlic pepper. Reduce the heat to medium, and cook the potatoes for about 20 minutes, stirring occasionally, until tender and browned. Crumble bacon over the top before serving.
In a quart jar, combine all ingredients in layers, placing flour on bottom, then cinnamon in middle and other ingredients on top.  Place seal on jar. Store in a cool, dry place up to 6 months. To make Batter for Cinnamon Pancakes: In a medium bowl, combine milk, egg, vegetable oil. Whisk in 1 1/3 cups prepared Dry Pancake Mix until moistened but still lumpy. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
In a large bowl, beat together egg, milk, water and oil.  Beat in flour, sugar and salt until smooth. Heat a medium, nonstick skillet over medium-high heat.  Place a ladleful of crepe batter into center of pan, tilting to coat the bottom.  Cook until golden brown on one side, turning once, 2 to 5 minutes.  Continue with remaining batter. In a small saucepan over low heat, melt chocolate chips, stirring constantly.  Remove from heat. To assemble, spread some melted chocolate on the lighter side of one crepe.  Place a line of overlapping strawberries down the center of the crepe and roll it up.  Top with whipped topping and drizzle with a bit more chocolate.  Repeat with remaining crepes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).   Grease and flour 3 - 1 pound coffee cans. Sift together the dry ingredients . Combine the vegetable oil, water, canned pumpkin and eggs.  Slowly add dry ingredients to egg mixture and mix until blended Evenly distribute the batter between the coffee cans.  Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 50-55 minutes or until a toothpick inserted in center comes out clean and top of bread is browned.  Cool bread in coffee cans on a rack for 15 minutes. Remove bread from cans by running a knife around the inside and turning can upside down to dislodge bread (should slide right out!).  Cool completely.
Combine baking soda with the boiling water.  Soak the dates in the water and baking soda solution for 30 minutes. Cream sugar and butter together.  Add eggs, vanilla, dates, nuts, flour, and salt. Divide batter equally between two 9 x 5 (or 8 1/2 x 4 1/2) inch greased loaf pans.  Bake 1 hour at 300 degrees F (150 degrees C) (or until loaf tests done).   Can be frozen when cool.
Preheat oven to 200 degrees F (95 degrees C). In a small bowl combine the soy milk and water. In a large bowl, combine the flour, cornmeal, baking powder, baking soda and salt. Stir in the soy milk mixture just until combined. Fold in the blueberries and let the batter sit for 5 minutes. Lightly oil a skillet or griddle and heat over medium heat. Pour about 1/4 cup of batter onto the hot griddle and cook until pancakes are bubbly on top and edges are slightly dry looking. Turn and cook until pancakes are browned. Transfer to a baking sheet and keep warm in the oven while cooking the remaining batter. Serve warm with syrup or jam.
Place the bacon in a large, deep skillet, and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on a paper towel-lined plate. When cool, chop the bacon, and set aside. Beat the butter, white sugar, and brown sugar together in a large mixing bowl until fluffy with an electric mixer on medium speed, then mix in egg, and vanilla extract until thoroughly combined. Whisk the flour, baking soda, salt, and cinnamon together in a bowl, and stir the flour mixture into the butter mixture. Gradually stir in the oats and bacon, about 1/3 cup of oats at a time, and cover the dough. Refrigerate at least 1 hour. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Thoroughly grease baking sheets. Scoop about 1/3 cup of dough per cookie, roll into balls, and place the balls at least 3 inches apart on the greased baking sheets. Use a fork dipped in water to flatten the balls slightly. Bake in the preheated oven until the cookies are golden brown with slightly browner edges, 10 to 12 minutes. Allow to cool on baking sheets 3 to 5 minutes before removing to finish cooling on racks. To make glaze, whisk confectioners' sugar, water, and maple syrup together in a bowl until smooth. Let the glaze stand about 5 minutes to slightly thicken; drizzle onto the tops of the cookies. Allow glazed cookies to stand about 20 minutes to set up before storing.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, stirring occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes; remove from heat. Stir green onions into bacon and saute in hot fat until slightly softened, 1 to 2 minutes. Transfer bacon mixture to a strainer to drain, retaining drippings. Whisk flour, cornmeal, baking powder, salt, black pepper, and cayenne pepper together in a large bowl. Add drained bacon mixture, milk, Cheddar cheese, eggs, melted butter, and sugar to flour mixture; whisk until batter is smooth. Let batter rest for 10 minutes. Combine maple syrup and chipotle chile powder together in a small bowl; whisk until chile powder is completely dissolved. Heat 1 teaspoon bacon drippings, 1 teaspoon oil, and 1 teaspoon butter on a griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by 1/4-cupful onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Transfer pancakes to plate and top with maple syrup.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Prepare pastry for a one crust pie as directed on package.  Divide pastry into 4 equal parts.  Roll each part into a 6 inch circle on a well floured, cloth covered board with a floured, cloth covered rolling pin.  Fit pastry over backs of large muffin cups (3 x 1 1/2 inch), or 6 ounce custard cups; make pleats so pastry will fit closely.  If using individual pie pans or tart pans, cut circles 1 inch larger than inverted pans, and fit into pans.  Prick surface.  Place tarts on an ungreased cookie sheet. Bake until light brown, about 8 to 10 minutes.  Cool 5 minutes, and carefully remove from cups.  Reduce oven temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place 2  bacon slices in the bottom of each pastry cup.  Sprinkle cheese over the meat, making slight well in centers.  Break 1 egg into each.  Add 1 tablespoon milk into each tart.  Sprinkle with nutmeg and pepper.  Place tarts on an ungreased cookie sheet Bake until eggs are soft cooked, about 15 to 20 minutes.
In a blender, combine strawberries, banana and peaches. Blend until fruit is pureed. Blend in the juice. Add ice and blend to desired consistency. Pour into glasses and serve.
On lightly floured surface, gently roll each sheet of puff pastry into a 12-inch square. Lay 1 sheet puff pastry into a deep-dish pie plate or springform pan; set aside. Melt 1/4 cup butter in a large skillet until sizzling. Add potatoes, onion, 1/4 teaspoon salt, and 1/4 teaspoon pepper. Cover and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until potatoes are lightly browned, crisp, and tender, 12 to 15 minutes. Remove from heat and set aside. Combine the eggs, parsley, a pinch of salt and pepper, and 2 tablespoons water in a bowl and whisk well. Melt 1 tablespoon butter in a clean skillet over medium heat until butter sizzles. Pour half of omelet mixture (3/4 cup) into heated skillet. Cook over medium heat. As omelet mixture sets, lift edges slightly with spatula to allow uncooked portion to flow underneath. Continue cooking until set, about 2 to 3 minutes. Slide omelet onto cookie sheet. Repeat with remaining tablespoon of butter and omelet mixture. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Layer ingredients into pie plate on top of puff pastry in the following order: one of the omelets, 4 ounces ham, half of the fried potatoes, and 1 cup shredded cheese. Top with remaining potatoes, ham, cheese, and omelet. Cover the torte with the remaining sheet of puff pastry. Press together edges of both sheets of puff pastry to form a rim; trim off excess. Crimp or flute edges. The torte can now be refrigerated overnight (see Cook's Note). In small bowl, whisk together 1 egg and 1 tablespoon water; brush over puff pastry. Bake in preheated oven until the pastry is a rich golden brown, 30 to 35 minutes. Let stand at least 5 minutes; cut into wedges. You may serve the torte warm or at room temperature.
Beat eggs until fluffy; beat in sugar and salt. In a separate bowl, stir flour and baking powder together. Stir milk and flour mixture alternately into eggs, starting and ending with milk. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Do not turn pancake until tiny holes appear all over the uncooked side (top) of the pancake in the pan. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Preheat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. In a medium bowl, mix rolled oats, pastry flour, baking powder, baking soda, sea salt, flax seeds, and chocolate chips. Gradually blend in soy milk. Pour batter about 1/4 cup at a time onto the prepared griddle. Cook 1 to 2 minutes, until bubbly. Flip, and continue cooking until lightly browned.
In a small pot, bring the water and wild rice to a boil. Cover, reduce heat to low, and simmer 45 minutes. Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Bake the pie crust 10 minutes, or until golden brown. Reduce heat to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). In a bowl, mix the cooked rice, ham, red bell pepper, green onion tops, and mushrooms. In a separate bowl, mix the eggs, sour cream, mustard, salt, and pepper. Sprinkle the bottom of the pie crust with 1 cup Swiss cheese. Spread the rice, ham, and vegetable mixture over the cheese, and cover with the egg mixture. Top with remaining Swiss cheese. Bake 30 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean. Let stand 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat an oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C).  Bake pie shells in the preheated oven until edge of crust is golden, about 10 minutes. Set crust aside, and lower the heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat, and stir in the sausage. Cook and stir until the sausage is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink. Place the sausage on a towel lined plat,e and discard any excess grease from the pan. Add the mushrooms and butter to the skillet, and cook and stir until the mushrooms are a light golden brown, about 5 minutes. Spread sausage and mushrooms evenly over the bottom of pie crusts. Combine the cream, eggs, flour, butter, lemon juice, salt, and pepper in a medium bowl. Pour into the pastry crust, allowing egg mixture to thoroughly cover the sausage mixture. Sprinkle top with Parmesan cheese. Bake until light and puffy, about 35 minutes.  Allow to stand 10 minutes before slicing.
Place potatoes into a large pot and cover with salted water; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low and simmer until almost tender but still firm, about 15 minutes. Drain and finely chop. Cook beef in a large cast-iron or non-stick skillet over medium heat until fat begins to render. Stir green onions, salt, and pepper into beef. Add garlic and butter; cook and stir until butter is melted and garlic is fragrant, 1 to 2 minutes. Stir potatoes, salsa, and a pinch of salt into beef mixture. Pat mixture down in the skillet with a spatula and divide hash into 4 sections. Cook, without stirring, until a crust forms on the bottom, about 5 minutes. Flip sections and cook until a crust forms on the bottom again, about 5 minutes more. Repeat cooking and flipping process, flipping every 5 minutes, until hash stays together and has a golden crust, 10 to 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Line an 8x8-inch baking dish with aluminum foil, letting foil hang down over the sides of the pan; spray pan with cooking spray. Stir oats, wheat germ, flax seed, protein powder, cinnamon, and salt together in a bowl. Mash bananas in a separate large bowl and stir 1/4 cup Jif(R) peanut butter, honey, and vanilla extract into bananas, mixing well. Stir dry ingredients into banana mixture and spread into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven for 20 minutes. Spread 1/4 cup natural peanut butter over top. Continue baking until lightly browned on the edges and set, 10 more minutes. Let cool in the pan and lift bars onto a work surface using aluminum foil as handles. Cut into bars, wrap in plastic wrap, and store in refrigerator.
Preheat an oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Whisk the eggs, flour, milk, salt, vanilla extract, and cinnamon in a bowl; set aside. Put the butter in a 9x11-inch baking dish. Melt the butter in the preheated oven, making sure it doesn't burn, about 5 minutes. Pour the batter into the baking dish with the melted butter. Return to the oven and bake until the pancake is puffed and no longer moist in the center, 20 to 25 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, 5 to 8 minutes. Drain bacon on paper towels. Spread bacon into the bottom of a 9x13-inch baking dish to cover. Spread potato nuggets over the bacon. Beat eggs, milk, salt, and pepper together in a bowl; pour over the layer of potato nuggets. Top with Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until hot in the center, about 1 hour.
Spray a 9x13-inch baking dish with cooking spray, and place the bread cubes into the dish. In a bowl, mix together the pumpkin puree, sugar, cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg, vanilla extract, salt, eggs, milk, evaporated milk, and pecans. Pour the pumpkin mixture over the bread cubes. Cover the dish with plastic wrap, and refrigerate overnight. The next day, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Uncover and bake the casserole until the pumpkin mixture is set and a toothpick inserted into the center of the casserole comes out clean, about 45 minutes.
Coat a 9x13 inch baking dish with cooking spray. Place 1/2 of the bread cubes in dish; top with 1 1/2 cups blueberries. Scatter cream cheese over berries. Cover with remaining bread cubes. In a mixing bowl, whisk together eggs, maple syrup, and milk. Pour egg mixture over bread in pan. Cover, and chill overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake strata, covered, for 30 minutes. Remove cover, and bake for an additional 30 minutes. While the strata is baking, prepare the blueberry syrup. Combine sugar, cornstarch, and water in a saucepan. Bring mixture to a boil over high heat; cook for 5 minutes. Pour in remaining 1 1/2 cups blueberries; continue cooking for 10 minutes. Remove from heat, and stir in butter. Serve warm over slices of the strata.
Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease 12 muffin cups. Place bacon in a skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. In a large bowl, combine flour, baking powder, baking soda, sugar, wheat germ and salt. In a separate bowl, combine eggs, milk, corn, butter, oil and bacon. Stir egg mixture into dry ingredients, just until combined. Spoon batter into prepared muffin cups. Bake in preheated oven for 20 to 25, until golden brown.
In a medium-size mixing bowl, beat yolks until thick. In a separate bowl, sift together flour, salt and sugar. Add the sugar mixture and milk into the egg yolks incrementally. Stir in the sour cream, In a medium-size mixing bowl, beat egg whites until stiff but not dry. Fold the egg whiles into the batter. Heat skillet or griddle to a high temperature. Place a small amount of oil on the skillet and pour about 1 tablespoon of batter onto the skillet, and spread the batter out evenly. Brown the pancake on one side. Flip pancake over when bubbles appear on surface. Brown on the other side. Repeat process with remaining batter.
Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. In a large mixing bowl, mix together oats, flour, sugar, salt, baking soda and baking powder. Stir in eggs and buttermilk. Fold in blueberries. Pour or spoon the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Combine the banana, strawberries, cinnamon, milk, and food coloring in a blender; blend until smooth; serve immediately.
Use 2 tablespoons of the butter to spread over one side of each slice of bread. On three of the slices, spread a layer of Dijon mustard over the butter, and top each with 4 slices of ham. On the other three, spread mayonnaise, and top each one with 2 slices of Swiss cheese. Press ham and cheese sides of sandwiches together. In a flat bottomed dish, whisk together the flour, baking powder, salt, eggs, and water until blended. Set aside. Heat remaining butter and vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Dip both sides of each sandwich in the egg mixture, and fry in the oil and butter until browned, flipping to brown on each side.
Place the potatoes into a saucepan and fill with enough water to cover. Bring to a boil, then simmer over medium heat until tender enough to pierce with a fork, about 10 minutes. Drain and mash potatoes, then set aside. Meanwhile, combine cabbage and carrot in another saucepan and add just enough water to barely cover the bottom of the pan. Cook over medium heat until tender, about 5 minutes. Drain off liquid and stir into the mashed potatoes along with the onion, mustard and Cheddar cheese. Season with salt and pepper. Shape the mixture into 4 patties. Heat a greased grill pan over medium-high heat. Place the patties on the pan and grill until heated through and golden brown, about 5 minutes on each side. Serve right away.
In a medium bowl, mix together the pork sausage and Worcestershire sauce. Combine the flour, salt and pepper; mix into the sausage.
                                    Watch Now Divide the sausage into four equal parts. Mold each part around one of the hard-cooked eggs, rolling between your hands to shape. Place the beaten egg and bread crumbs into separate dishes. Dip the balls into the egg, then roll in the bread crumbs until coated. Shake off any excess.
                                    Watch Now Heat the oil in a large saucepan or deep fryer to 365 degrees F (180 degrees C), or until a cube of bread dropped into the oil turns brown in 1 minute. Lower the eggs carefully into the hot oil. Fry for 5 minutes, or until deep golden brown.
                                    Watch Now
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a 9x13-inch baking dish with aluminum foil and spray with nonstick cooking spray. Melt together the brown sugar, peanut butter, honey, butter flavored spread, and vanilla extract in a small saucepan over low heat.  Stir until well combined; remove from heat. Combine the oats, cinnamon, and salt in a large bowl.  Pour the brown sugar mixture into bowl; stir well to combine. Stir in the chocolate chips, dried cranberries, and almonds. Spoon into the prepared pan; pat down and spread evenly. Bake in preheated oven until browned, 15 to 20 minutes.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Beat together the cream cheese, sugar, butter, eggs, and banana in a large bowl until very smooth. Stir in the flour, baking powder, baking soda, and walnuts until just combined. Pour the batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 1 hour and 15 minutes. Cool in the pan for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Cook sausage in large nonstick skillet over medium heat 4-5 minutes or until hot.  Stir in potatoes. Beat eggs, cheese, salt and pepper in large bowl with wire whisk.  Pour over sausage mixture. Cook over medium-high heat 2 minutes, occasionally lifting edge with spatula and tilting skillet to allow uncooked egg to flow underneath.  (Do not stir.) Reduce heat to medium-low; cover.  Cook 14-17 minutes or until eggs are set. Top with tomato and onions.  Cut into 8 wedges to serve.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly spray a 9x5 inch loaf pan or 16 muffin cups with cooking spray. Stir the skim milk and lemon juice together in a glass measuring cup; let stand until curdled, about 30 minutes. Whisk together the whole wheat flour, cocoa powder, baking powder, baking soda, cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt; set aside. Beat the eggs and sugar together with an electric mixer until smooth. Mix in the mashed bananas, the milk mixture, canola oil, and vanilla extract. Stir in the flour mixture just until all ingredients are moistened. Pour the batter into the prepared pan or muffin cups. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 1 hour for a loaf, or 30 minutes for muffins. Cool in the pan for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9 inch pie dish. Press hash browns onto the bottom and sides of pie dish. Bake in preheated oven for 25 to 30 minutes, or until it begins to brown. Meanwhile, place ground beef and onion in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until beef evenly brown. Drain, crumble and allow to cool. In a medium bowl, whisk together milk, eggs and cornstarch. Stir in 1/2 pound shredded cheese and ground beef mixture. Mix in the liquid smoke, bacon bits, Worcestershire sauce and salt. Pour into hash brown crust. Bake in preheated oven for 20 minutes. Remove from oven, sprinkle 1/4 pound of grated sharp cheddar on top, and place back in the oven. Bake 15 minutes, or until filling is puffed and golden brown. Let stand for 20 minutes before serving.
In a skillet over medium-high heat, fry the Canadian bacon on each side until evenly browned. Fill a large saucepan with about 3 inches water, and bring to a simmer. Pour in the vinegar. Carefully break the 4 eggs into the water, and cook 2 to 3 minutes, until whites are set but yolks are still soft. Remove eggs with a slotted spoon. Meanwhile, melt the butter until bubbly in a small pan or in the microwave. Remove from heat before butter browns. In a blender or large food processor, blend the egg yolks, heavy cream, cayenne pepper, and salt until smooth. Add half of the hot butter in a thin steady stream, slow enough so that it blends in at least as fast as you are pouring it in. Blend in the lemon juice using the same method, then the remaining butter. Place open English muffins onto serving plates. Top with 1 slice Canadian bacon and 1 poached egg. Drizzle with the cream sauce, and serve at once.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Place pizza crusts upside down on cookie sheets and bake for 5 to 7 minutes. Do not allow to brown. Beat eggs, milk, salt and pepper. Scramble eggs until firm. Remove crusts from oven, turn right side up, spread 1/2 can of cream of celery soup on top of each crust.  Spread 1/2 of egg mixture on each crust. Sprinkle bacon bits on one pizza and cooked sausage on the other. Cover each with onions and peppers.  Top each pizza with 2 cups of cheese. Bake in preheated oven, for 25 to 30 minutes, until cheese is golden brown.
In a large bowl, beat together eggs, orange juice, milk, sugar, nutmeg and vanilla extract. Place bread slices in a tightly spaced single layer in the bottom of a flat dish or baking pan. Pour milk mixture over bread, cover and refrigerate overnight, turning once. When ready to cook, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Coat a jelly roll pan or rimmed baking sheet evenly with the melted butter. Arrange soaked bread slices in a single layer on pan. Sprinkle evenly with orange peel and pecans. Bake in preheated oven until golden, 20 to 25 minutes. Check slices during last 10 minutes of baking time to avoid burning.
In a blender, combine milk, instant breakfast mix, peanut butter, bananas and ice. Blend until smooth, about 30 seconds. Serve immediately.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Mix the ham, onion, red bell peppers, and asparagus in the prepared baking dish. In a large bowl, beat together the eggs, milk, flour, Parmesan, tarragon, salt, and pepper. Pour over the ham mixture. Bake 20 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean. Sprinkle with Cheddar cheese. Continue baking 3 to 5 minutes, or until cheese is melted. Let stand 5 to 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Evenly distribute bacon across bottom of each pastry shell, followed by half of cheese. Add broccoli, scallions, and tomatoes, then cover with remaining cheese. In a medium bowl, whisk together eggs, half-and-half, nutmeg, cayenne, salt, and pepper. Pour half of mixture into each pastry shell. Bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes, then reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and bake an additional 45 minutes, until quiches are set in center.
Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C).  Lightly grease two 8x4 inch loaf pans. Beat together 2 tablespoons of softened butter and cream cheese in a large bowl until fluffy.  Slowly beat in sugar until well incorporated.  Add the egg and mix well.  Sift together the flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a separate bowl.  In a different bowl, mix together the bananas, milk, 2 tablespoons rum, lime zest, lime juice, and vanilla extract; stir well.  Pour 1/3 of the flour mixture into the butter and mix well.  Mix in 1/2 of the mashed bananas.  Continue with another 1/3 of the flour, followed by the remaining banana mixture, and finally the remaining flour.  Fold in 1/4 cup pecans and 1/4 cup coconut flakes. Pour the mixture into the loaf pans, and bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about one hour.  When finished, cool for 10 minutes in the pan, remove, and finish cooling on a wire rack. After you take the banana bread out of the oven, prepare the topping by stirring together the brown sugar, remaining butter, lime juice, and 2 teaspoons of rum in a small saucepan over medium-high heat.  Bring to a simmer stirring constantly; cook until the sugar has dissolved and the mixture is smooth, about one minute.  Remove from heat, and stir in 2 tablespoons pecans, and 2 tablespoons coconut.  Spoon this topping over the loaves while they are still warm.  The topping will harden slightly when the loaf cools.
Heat the milk in a small saucepan until it bubbles, then remove from heat. Add the butter, salt and sugar and stir until melted; let cool until lukewarm. In a small bowl, dissolve yeast in warm water. Let stand until creamy, about 10 minutes. In a large bowl, combine milk mixture with the yeast mixture. Mix in the egg and 3 cups of flour. Stir in the remaining flour, 1/2 cup at a time, beating well after each addition. When the dough has pulled together, turn it out onto a lightly floured surface and knead until smooth and elastic, about 8 minutes. Lightly oil a large bowl, place the dough in the bowl and turn to coat with oil. Cover with a damp cloth and let rise in a warm place until doubled in volume, about 1 hour. Deflate the dough and turn it out onto a lightly floured surface. Divide the dough into two equal pieces and form into loaves. Place the loaves into two lightly greased 9x5 inch loaf pans. Cover the loaves with a damp cloth and let rise until dough reaches the pan tops, about 30 minutes. Meanwhile, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in preheated oven for 45 to 50 minutes, or until bottom of the loaves sound hollow when tapped. Place on wire racks to cool.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray 12 muffin cups with cooking spray. Cook and stir bacon in a skillet over medium-high heat until crisp, about 10 minutes. Transfer bacon to a bowl, reserving bacon grease in the skillet. Combine spinach, mushrooms, green bell pepper, onion, salt, and ground black pepper to taste in the skillet with bacon grease; cook and stir until softened, about 5 minutes. Transfer vegetable mixture to a bowl and place in the freezer to cool, about 5 minutes. Whisk eggs and cream together in a bowl; stir in 1 cup Colby-Jack cheese, 1/2 teaspoon salt, 1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper, onion powder, and garlic powder. Add cooled vegetables and bacon to egg mixture and mix gently. Scoop 1/4 cup egg mixture into each muffin cup; top each with remaining Colby-Jack cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until egg cups are set, about 20 minutes.
Arrange potato pieces evenly on a microwave-safe plate. Microwave on high until just tender, about 4 minutes. Let cool to room temperature. Cut potatoes into bite-size chunks. Heat butter and olive oil in a non-stick skillet over medium-high heat. When butter melts and starts to turn brown, swirl the pan and add the potatoes. Shake pan to arrange in an even layer. Season with salt, pepper, paprika, garlic powder, and onion powder. As potatoes brown, toss them and keep turning them every few minutes until they are crusty and crispy-edged and a rich reddish-brown color, 10 to 12 minutes. If potatoes seem to be cooking too quickly, reduce heat to medium. Serve topped with chopped chives.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions and spray with cooking spray. Whisk milk, eggs, maple syrup, vanilla extract, and salt together in a wide bowl until thoroughly combined. Dip bread slices 1 at a time in the egg mixture, coating both sides completely. Lift bread with a slotted spatula to allow excess egg mixture to drain back into the bowl. Place dipped bread slices on a rimmed baking sheet and let rest until mixture soaks in, about 2 minutes. Place dipped bread in the preheated waffle iron. Gently close the lid without forcing it down. Cook according to manufacturer's instructions until golden brown, 3 to 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining slices.
Sift the flour into a medium bowl, and stir in the sugar. Make a well in the center, and add the egg. Stir with a wooden spoon while gradually pouring in the milk until you reach the consistency that you prefer. Thicker pikelets will need a thick batter, while thin pikelets will need a thin batter. Stir in melted butter last, beating until smooth. Heat a skillet over medium heat. Coat with cooking spray. Drop by large spoonfuls onto the hot skillet. Pikelets should be about 2 inches across. Flip when bubbles appear on the surface, and cook until browned on the other side.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat olive oil in an 8 inch oven-safe skillet over medium heat. Add onion, and season with a little salt and pepper. Cook, stirring until translucent. Add the salmon and olives; cook and stir briefly to release the flavors. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk and cream. Pour over the salmon and onion, and stir gently. Scatter cubes of cream cheese over the top. Cook over medium heat without stirring, until the edges appear firm. Place the skillet in the preheated oven, and bake for 20 minutes, or until nicely browned and puffed. Flip onto a serving plate, and cut into wedges to serve.
Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Place a steamer basket in a medium saucepan filled with about 1 inch of water. Place broccoli in the steamer basket, and bring water to a boil. Cover, and steam 5 minutes, or until broccoli is tender but firm. Heat the oil in a medium skillet over medium heat, and saute garlic and onion until tender. Mix in the broccoli, and continue cooking 1 to 2 minutes. Season with red pepper flakes. Transfer to the pie crust. In a medium bowl, whisk together eggs, egg yolk, and heavy cream. Pour over the broccoli mixture in the pie crust. Season with salt and pepper. Top with Provolone. Bake 35 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 275 degrees F (135 degrees C). In a large bowl, mix oats, wheat germ, and wheat bran. In a medium bowl, blend brown sugar, vegetable oil, honey, and water. Mix in vanilla extract, cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt. Stir the brown sugar mixture into the oat mixture until evenly moist, and transfer to a large, shallow baking dish. Bake 45 minutes in the preheated oven, stirring every 15 minutes, until lightly brown. Mix dates, pecans, and coconut into the dish, and continue baking about 15 minutes. Allow to cool, and store in airtight containers.
In a blender, combine milk, oranges, banana, sugar, salt and yogurt. Blend for about 1 minute. Insert ice cubes, and blend until smooth. Pour into glasses and serve.
In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs and milk using a fork. Whisk in the salt and pepper. Heat a small non-stick pan over medium heat. Pour the egg mixture into the pan, and cook. Stir, scrape, and cut up the eggs while cooking until no liquid remains. Enjoy!
Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Cut a hole in the center of each slice of bread with a round cookie cutter or the rim of a glass. Place the bread into the hot skillet, crack one egg into the hole of each slice of bread, break the yolk and cook until the white is mostly opaque. Flip the slices of bread over. Form  sandwich halves by topping each piece of bread with 1 slice of cheese, a slice of ham, then another slice of cheese. Season with salt and pepper and cook until the eggs are fully set; remove from the skillet. Make two sandwiches by putting together the halves. Place on a microwave-safe plate and microwave on high until the cheese is fully melted, 30 to 45 seconds.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Butter a 10 inch pie plate using about 1 tablespoon of butter. Sprinkle bread crumbs into the pie dish and shake to coat evenly, discarding excess. Pour the milk into a large saucepan and warm over medium heat. Add the salmon fillets and bring to a simmer. Cover and cook for about 10 minutes, or until salmon can be flaked with a fork. Melt the remaining butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Add the onion and Swiss chard; cook and stir until tender and most of the liquid has evaporated. Season with salt, pepper, marjoram and nutmeg. Set aside to cool; you should have about one cup of chard and onion. Spread the chard mixture and flake the salmon into the prepared pie plate. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs and one cup of cooled milk from poaching the salmon. Pour into the pie dish. Bake for 35 minutes in the preheated oven, or until the center is set. Cool slightly before serving.
Heat the olive oil in a large stockpot over medium heat. Combine the oats and cinnamon and add them to the pot. Cook and stir until lightly toasted, stirring constantly, 3 to 4 minutes. Pour the oats out onto a large baking sheet and add the butter to the pot. When the butter has melted, stir in the honey, molasses and brown sugar. When the mixture starts to simmer, return the oats to the pot and continue to cook and stir until coated and hot. Remove from the heat and stir in the almonds and cherries. Pour onto a large cookie sheet and allow to cool. The granola will harden as it cools. When cool, transfer to an airtight container and store at room temperature.
In a medium saucepan, combine water, brown sugar, cinnamon, and syrup. Heat mixture to a boil. When water is at a boil, reduce heat and add in oats.  Cook for about 5 minutes, or until all water is soaked by the oats. Remove from heat, stir in apples and raisins and serve.
To make the mustard sauce: Crack 1 egg into a small saucepan. With the heat on low, stir in mayonnaise, mustard and sugar. When it just starts to boil, it's done.  Remove and let sit until cool, then chill for at least 10 minutes. Place 6 whole eggs in a saucepan and cover with cold water. Bring water to a boil and cook eggs for 10 to 12 minutes. Remove from hot water, cool, peel. Heat oil in deep-fryer to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Put the sausage into a bowl with the finely parsley, lemon rind, nutmeg, marjoram, salt and pepper. Work all the ingredients well into the sausage with your hands.  Make a coating for each hand boiled egg out of the sausage, working it round the eggs with wet hands to form an even layer. Roll the covered eggs in beaten egg, and then in dried breadcrumbs. Carefully slide in 3 eggs and fry for 4 to 5 minutes, until they turn deep golden brown. Turn them as they cook so that they brown evenly. Remove with a slotted spoon, drain on paper towel, and repeat with the remaining 3 eggs. Serve eggs with mustard sauce.
Beat eggs and red pepper flakes together in a bowl. Stir tomatoes, feta, and basil leaves into egg mixture. Heat olive oil in a nonstick skillet over high heat until oil starts to shimmer. Pour egg mixture into hot oil and cook, without stirring, for 5 seconds. Cook and stir egg mixture until eggs are scrambled and softly set, about 30 seconds. Transfer eggs to a plate and sprinkle with sea salt.
Stir together flour, oats, brown sugar, baking powder, cinnamon, cloves, and salt in a large bowl. In a separate large bowl, lightly beat together the milk, egg, pumpkin, and oil. Stir flour mixture into the pumpkin mixture, blending just until moistened. Heat a lightly greased griddle over medium high heat. Pour batter, 1/3 cup at a time, onto the prepared griddle. Make a jack-o-lantern face in each pancake with the chocolate chips. Cook until bubbles appear on the surface, then flip and cook until golden brown on the other side, about 5 minutes per side.
In a large bowl, whisk together 4 cups of flour, the yeast, white sugar, and salt. In a saucepan over low heat, melt the unsalted butter with the milk until the mixture is warm, about 110 degrees F (43 degrees C). Gradually whisk about 1/3 of the butter-milk mixture into the beaten eggs, then return the egg mixture back into the remaining milk mixture. Stir the lemon zest into the liquid ingredients (set aside lemon juice for later). Pour the liquid ingredients into the flour mixture, and stir until thoroughly combined. Add enough flour to make a soft dough; turn the dough out onto a floured surface, and knead until smooth and elastic, 8 to 10 minutes. Place dough into an oiled bowl, and turn the dough around to cover surface lightly with oil. Cover the bowl with plastic wrap, and allow to rise in a warm place until doubled, about 1 hour. Punch down the dough, and allow to rest for 10 minutes. Divide the dough in half, and roll each half into a round ball. On a floured surface, roll out a ball into a 12-inch circle. Place a drinking glass, face down, into the center of the circle to prevent cutting the dough too far into the center. Cut the dough with a knife, from the edge of the dough circle to the rim of the glass, into quarters. Cut each quarter into 5 narrow wedge-shaped strips. (Center of the dough is uncut.) Remove the drinking glass. There are 20 narrow wedge-shaped strips surrounding the uncut center of the dough. Pick up two adjacent strips, and twist them together about 4 times; pinch the ends of the two pieces together at the top. Gently coil to form a rough flower shape. Arrange the round into the middle of the circle, where the drinking glass was. Pick up two more adjacent strips, and twist and pinch them as before; coil them into a rough round, and arrange the new petal next to the center rosette. Repeat with remaining 16 strips, twisting and pinching them in twos, coiling and arranging them into 8 more petals around the center rosette. Finished bread has 9 petals surrounding the center round. Repeat steps with the second ball of dough to make two breads. Grease a baking sheet, or line with parchment paper. Place the shaped breads onto the prepared baking sheet, reshaping them into rounds if needed; cover with a clean kitchen towel, and place into a warm spot to rise until almost doubled, 30 to 45 minutes. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Beat the egg yolk with water in a small bowl, and brush the mixture over both the breads. Bake in the preheated oven until the breads have turned golden brown, about 25 minutes. Allow to cool. Use your fingers to gently deepen the indentations in the center of each petal, and fill each with about 1/2 to 1 teaspoon of raspberry jam. Mix the reserved lemon juice and confectioners' sugar in a bowl to form a glaze; drizzle the glaze in thin lines all over both the breads. Allow glaze to set. To serve, pull the petals apart.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Toss the potatoes with the vegetable oil in a bowl until potatoes are well coated. Press the potatoes into a 10-inch pie pan to create a crust. Bake potatoes in the preheated oven until golden brown, about 30 minutes. Remove pan from oven, and reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). While the potatoes are baking, heat a large skillet over medium-high heat and stir in the sausage. Cook and stir until the sausage is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink. Drain and discard any excess grease. Combine the sausage with the eggs, mushrooms, pepperjack cheese, Swiss cheese, milk, 1 tablespoon parsley, garlic salt, and black pepper in a large bowl. Pour the egg mixture into the prepared potato crust. Bake in the oven until eggs are set, about 25 minutes. Arrange the tomato slices over the eggs and sprinkle the remaining 1 1/2 teaspoon parsley on top. Return to the oven and continue baking until the tomatoes soften, about 5 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Prepare a 10x13-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Mix eggs, cottage cheese, Monterey Jack cheese, green chiles, butter, flour, bacon, and baking powder together in a large bowl; pour into prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes. Reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and continue baking until a toothpick inserted into the center of the casserole comes out clean, about 30 minutes more.
In a small saucepan, heat molasses and 1/2 cup butter until almost boiling. Remove from heat and let cool slightly. Stir in baking soda, milk and egg. In a large bowl, sift together flour, ginger, cinnamon and salt. Make a well in the center and pour in the molasses mixture. Mix until smooth. Spray preheated waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray. Pour mix onto hot waffle iron. Cook until golden brown. Serve hot with chocolate sauce. To make chocolate sauce: In a saucepan, combine water, 1 cup sugar, cornstarch, cocoa powder and 1 teaspoon salt. Cook over medium heat, stirring constantly, until mixture comes to a boil. Remove from heat and add vanilla and 2 tablespoons butter; stir until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, cream the butter. Beat in egg, molasses and banana. Mix in whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour, baking soda, salt, nutmeg and walnuts; stir until well blended. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven for 55 to 65 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted into center of the loaf comes out clean.
In a large mixing bowl blend together the flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, salt, cinnamon, poppy seeds, and lemon pudding mix. Make a well in the center of the bowl. In a separate bowl, mix together the Amish starter, eggs, milk, applesauce, vanilla, and vegetable oil. Add to dry ingredients and blend until just combined. Pour batter into 2 greased loaf pans. Bake in a preheated 325 degree F(165 degrees C) oven for one hour. Cool for 10 minutes on  a wire rack. Remove bread from pan.
Place flour in a large bowl. Sprinkle in the chopped butter; rub butter into the flour until it resembles bread crumbs. Stir in the grated cheese. Sprinkle water over the flour mixture, a teaspoon at a time, stirring lightly with a fork. Add just enough water to allow the dough form a ball and cleanly leave the sides of the bowl. Wrap the dough in plastic wrap, and refrigerate for at least 30 minutes. Preheat an oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Roll out dough, and place in a 9 inch pie/quiche pan. Use a fork to prick holes over the bottom of the pastry. Bake crust in preheated oven for 10 minutes before filling with quiche custard of your choice.
Preheat an oven to 250 degrees F (120 degrees C). Coat 2 baking sheets with nonstick cooking spray. Combine brown sugar, pumpkin pie spice, rolled oats, almonds, and pecans in a large bowl.  Mix the applesauce, honey, and vanilla in a separate large bowl.  Stir the oat mixture into the applesauce mixture, until granola begins to gather in clusters. Spoon granola evenly onto prepared baking sheets. Bake in preheated oven, stirring every 20 minutes, until lightly browned and crispy, about 1 hour. Remove from oven; cool to room temperature. Stir in raisins and cranberries; store in an airtight container.
Place pancake mix into a medium bowl, and stir in apple cider. Apple cider may be adjusted to achieve the desired thickness. Stir in cinnamon, nutmeg, brown sugar and vanilla. Mix in walnuts if using. Heat a large skillet over medium heat, and spray with cooking spray. Use about 1/4 cup of batter per pancake. Cook 3 to 4 pancakes at a time. Turn over when bubbles appear in the center, and cook until golden on the other side. Serve immediately with pats of butter and maple syrup.
Preheat a lightly oiled griddle to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Whisk almond flour, chocolate chips, baking soda, salt, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Whisk egg, egg white, honey, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Stir flour mixture into egg mixture, adding enough water to reach a pancake batter consistency. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the prepared griddle and cook until pancakes are golden brown and edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8-inch square pan. Combine oats, brown sugar, white sugar, baking powder, salt, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Whisk milk, eggs, canola oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Stir egg mixture into oats mixture until well combined; set aside until flavors blend, about 20 minutes. Spread oats mixture into prepared square pan. Bake in the preheated oven until edges are golden brown, about 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Pierce squash several times with a fork, and place in a microwave-safe dish. Microwave on high for 10 minutes, turn over, and continue cooking 10 minutes more. Squash flesh should be very tender inside. Set aside to cool. Cut squash in half lengthwise and scoop out seeds. Shred 1/2 cup of squash and place in a mixing bowl. Stir in egg, egg whites, evaporated milk, mozzarella cheese, and spinach until well combined. Spray a 9 inch pie place or quiche dish with cooking spray. Spread bread crumbs in the bottom and around the sides to coat. Pour egg mixture into prepared dish. Bake quiche in the preheated oven for 45 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean. Allow to cool for at least 10 minutes before cutting. Serve warm or at room temperature.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Coat an 8 inch square baking dish with non-stick cooking spray. In a large bowl, combine eggs and milk. With an electric mixer, beat until frothy. Blend in salt and hot pepper sauce. Stir in bacon, olives, tomatoes, green onions, mushrooms and cheese. Pour into prepared pan, and cover with lid or aluminum foil. Bake in preheated oven for 40 to 50 minutes, or until eggs are set in the center.
Place ingredients in the pan of the bread machine in the order recommended by the manufacturer. Select dough cycle; press Start. When the dough cycle has finished, divide into three equal portions.  Roll each piece into a rope 12 to 14 inches long.  Lay the three ropes side by side, then braid together.  Tuck the ends underneath, and place onto a greased baking sheet, cover loosely with a towel, and allow to rise until doubled in bulk. Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Brush the braid with beaten egg white and sprinkle with pearl sugar.  Bake in preheated oven until golden brown, 20 to 25 minutes.
Stir brown sugar into half-and-half until dissolved. Whip with a milk frother or small whisk. Pour coffee into a mug, and stir in caramel sauce until dissolved. Pour frothed half-and-half into coffee, and serve.
Place ingredients in the pan of the bread machine in the order recommended by the manufacturer. Select cycle; press Start. If your machine has a Fruit setting, add the cranberries and nuts at the signal, or about 5 minutes before the kneading cycle has finished.
Preheat the broiler on your oven. In a frying pan with an ovenproof handle heat the oil and saute onion, garlic and green bell pepper over a low heat. Saute until vegetables are just tender but not browned. Add the zucchini and continue cooking, stirring occasionally, until crisp-tender. Add the potatoes, stir well to combine, and continue cooking, stirring frequently, until the potatoes are heated through and starting to stick to the pan. Then add the tomatoes and black olives, stirring well to combine with the other ingredients, and cook just until the tomatoes have begun giving up their juice. Beat the eggs with the salt, pepper, oregano, and cayenne. When all the vegetables are cooked, pour the eggs over them Arrange the tomato slices over the top of the eggs, and sprinkle the mozzarella and Parmesan cheeses over the tomato slices. Cook gently over low heat until the eggs are almost set (they'll be firm around the edges and a bit runny in the middle). Slip the pan under the broiler for a minute or two, until the eggs are fully set and the cheese has melted and begun to brown. Cut into wedges and serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour a 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, cream together the butter and sugar until light and fluffy. Stir in the eggs one at a time, beating well with each addition.  In a separate bowl, stir together flour, baking powder, nutmeg, allspice and salt. Blend the flour mixture into the butter and egg mixture a bit at a time, beating well after each addition.. Stir in the banana and vanilla; mixing just enough to evenly combine. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven for 90 minutes, until a toothpick inserted into center of the loaf comes out clean. Cool the cake in the pan for 10 minutes and then turn out onto a wire rack to cool completely.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease an 8x8 inch baking dish. In a large mixing bowl, beat together milk, butter and egg substitute. Add the sugar, then gradually beat the flour in. Carefully stir in the baking powder and salt. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes. Cut into 16 square servings.
Place sausage and bacon in two large, deep skillets. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Butter one side of six slices of the bread. Placed slices butter side up in the bottom of a 9x13 inch baking pan. In a large bowl, stir together cooked sausage and bacon with onion and cheese. Place half of his mixture on top of buttered bread.  Then add another six slices of bread (no butter).  Add remaining meat/cheese mixture. Beat together milk and eggs; pour over top of casserole. Cover with foil and refrigerate overnight. The next morning: preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Bake, covered, in preheated oven for 45 to 60 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray 6 muffin cups with cooking spray. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until halfway cooked, about 5 minutes. Blot bacon slices with paper towels and cut into small pieces. Mix bacon, eggs, tomatoes, green onion, and black pepper together in a bowl. Pour mixture into the prepared muffin cups. Bake in the preheated oven until each muffin is set in the middle, 15 to 20 minutes.
Heat frying pan over medium heat and lightly spray with cooking spray.  Crack the egg into the pan and break the yolk.  Cook the egg to desired firmness.  Warm sliced ham in the pan while assembling sandwich. Toast pancakes in toaster and place one pancake on plate.  Place egg on top of pancake.  Pour 1 tablespoon of maple syrup over egg, place the cheese on top of egg, and a slice of warmed ham on top of the cheese.  Top the sandwich with the second pancake and pour another 1 tablespoon of maple syrup over the top of the sandwich.
In a blender, combine banana, strawberries, milk and yogurt. Blend until smooth. Pour into glasses and serve.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Bring about 1 inch water to a boil in a pot. Place the chopped broccoli in a steamer basket over boiling water, and steam 5 minutes, or until tender but firm. In a bowl, mix the Cheddar cheese, 3/4 cup flour, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and mustard. Mix in 1/4 cup butter until evenly moist. Press into the bottom and sides of an 8 inch pie dish. Melt the 1 tablespoon butter in a skillet over medium heat, and saute the onion and mushrooms until tender. Stir in 2 tablespoons flour, half and half, 1 teaspoon salt, and nutmeg. Bring to a boil, and cook 1 minute. Remove from heat. Mix in steamed broccoli. Gradually stir in eggs. Transfer to the pie crust. Bake 15 minutes in the preheated oven. Reduce heat to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C), and continue baking 20 minutes, until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean.
In a large bowl, mix the flour, powdered buttermilk, baking powder, and baking soda. In a separate bowl, whip the cream using an electric mixer; stir in  milk, egg yolks, and melted butter. Stir the milk mixture into the dry ingredients until smooth. In a clean glass or metal bowl, whip egg whites to stiff peaks.  Fold the egg whites and chocolate chips into the batter using a rubber spatula or wooden spoon. Preheat a waffle iron, and coat with cooking spray. Spoon batter onto the hot iron, and cook until there is no longer steam coming out and the waffles are light brown.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease a 9 x 9 inch casserole dish. In a large bowl combine biscuit mix, oregano, seasoning salt, garlic powder, salt, parsley and Parmesan cheese.  Stir in onion, eggs and oil.  Mix well and add zucchini.  Pour into prepared casserole dish. Bake in preheated oven for 30 to 35 minutes, or until cooked through and golden brown.  Let cool for 5 minutes before slicing.
Beat egg in a medium size mixing  bowl. Mix egg and onion with mashed potatoes.  Add salt and pepper. Heat olive oil in a medium size frying pan, over a medium heat. Scoop the potato mixutre into the frying pan in 4 inch circles, pat with a spatula to flatten the mounds  to approximately 1/2 to 1 inch thick. Cook until bottom is browned. Flip the patty over and brown on the other side.
In a large bowl combine sugar, oil, eggs, and vanilla. Add grated zucchini. In a separate bowl sift together the flour, baking soda, baking powder, salt, ground ginger, and ground cloves. Blend dry ingredients into zucchini mixture. Pour into two 8x5 loaf pans coated with cooking spray. Bake in a 325 degree F (165 degrees C) oven for one hour. Cool for 10 minutes and remove from pans. Cool on a wire rack.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease two 9x5-inch loaf pans. In a large bowl, mix the brown sugar, banana, eggs, and vanilla. For moister bread, add oil, if desired. In a separate bowl, sift together 3 cups flour, baking soda, salt, cinnamon, all spice, cardamom, and cloves. Alternately blend the flour mixture and beer into the banana mixture. Toss the walnuts with the remaining flour. Stir in the dates and ginger to the mixture and blend well. Pour into two loaf pans. Bake in preheated oven until inserted toothpick inserted into the center of each loaf comes out clean, about 1 hour.
Combine toasted almonds with oats, coconut and cinnamon.  Blend honey with oil and drizzle over almond-oat mixture, tossing to mix well.  Bake in oven at 350 degrees, 30 minutes, stirring occasionally.  Remove from oven; loosen with spatula; cool. Microwave Directions:  Combine as above in glass baking dish.  Cook on high 8 minutes, stirring every two minutes; cool.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place pie crust on a pie pan or baking dish. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir onion until softened and translucent, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to medium-low, and continue cooking and stirring until the onion is very tender and dark brown, 15 to 20 minutes more. Spread mozzarella cheese and tomatoes over the bottom of the pie crust. Whisk eggs, lemon juice, basil, salt, black pepper, and caramelized onion in a large bowl; pour mixture over cheese and tomatoes. Bake in preheated oven until eggs are set and crust is flaky, 30 to 40 minutes.
Stir milk and vinegar together in a bowl; set aside until milk "sours", about 5 minutes. Mix flour, white sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a separate bowl. Whisk egg, 2 tablespoons melted butter, and 1 1/2 teaspoons vanilla extract into milk mixture. Slowly pour milk mixture into flour mixture while whisking constantly until batter is just moistened and evenly mixed. Lumps are fine. Combine brown sugar, 1/4 cup melted butter, and cinnamon in a small bowl. Place a 1-quart resealable bag into a glass or cup. Pour cinnamon mixture into the bag; refrigerate until filling is as thick as toothpaste, about 10 minutes. Mix 1/4 cup softened butter and cream cheese together in a microwave-safe bowl; heat in microwave for 40 seconds. Stir mixture with a whisk or fork until smooth. Continue heating in microwave and stirring until mixture is completely melted. Stir confectioners' sugar and 1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract into cream cheese mixture until icing is smooth. Heat a griddle or skillet over medium heat and spray with cooking spray. Pour about 2/3 cup batter into the center of griddle. Cook pancake until bubbles start to appear, 2 to 3 minutes. Cut 1 corner off the center of the bag with filling. Swirl filling over pancake, leaving enough space around edges that filling doesn't touch the griddle. Flip pancake and cook until other side is lightly browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Drizzle icing over pancake. Repeat with remaining ingredients, spraying the griddle with cooking spray between each pancake.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray 2 9x5-inch loaf pans with cooking spray. Mix cake mix, pecans, bananas, water, vegetable oil, pudding mix, and eggs together in a large bowl with an electric mixer until evenly blended. Pour half the batter into each of the prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the middle of each loaf comes out clean, about 45 minutes.
Stir the brown sugar, sage, salt, basil, black pepper, onion powder, marjoram, and red pepper flakes together in a small bowl. Place the ground beef in a large bowl; mix the spice blend into the ground beef with your hands until evenly integrated. Refrigerate for 24 hours to let the flavors blend. Divide the ground beef mixture into 8 patties. Place a large skillet over medium heat; cook the patties in the skillet until firm, hot, and cooked in the center, 5 to 7 minutes per side. An instant-read thermometer inserted into the center should read 160 degrees F (70 degrees C).
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease three 9x5 inch loaf pans. Place the starter in a bowl, stir in the oil, sugar, eggs and vanilla and mix well. Combine the flour, baking soda, baking powder, instant pudding, and cinnamon. Add the flour mixture to the starter mixture and beat by hand. Add the pecans, raisins  and apples and mix well. Pour batter into the prepared pans. Bake at 325 degrees F (165 degrees C) for 1 hour.
Sprinkle nuts in bottom of a greased Bundt pan. Mix cinnamon and sugar together. Cut biscuits into fourths, and roll each piece in the cinnamon and sugar mixture.  Layer biscuits in pan. Melt butter or margarine, and dissolve the remainder of the sugar mixture in it.  Spoon over biscuits. Bake in a preheated 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) oven for 35 minutes.  Turn out onto a  platter, and serve.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Sprinkle cheese evenly in the bottom of the baking dish. In a large bowl, beat together eggs, milk, mustard powder, salt and pepper. Pour egg mixture on top of cheese. Bake in preheated oven for 40 minutes or until firm. Let cool slightly before cutting into squares to serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease 9x9 inch baking pan. In a large bowl, stir together oats, flour, baking powder, cinnamon and salt. In a separate bowl, cream together brown sugar and margarine. Beat in egg. Stir mixtures together just until blended. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes, until a toothpick inserted into center of pan comes out clean.
Spread butter onto one side of each slice of bread. Cut into quarters. Lay half of the bread, butter side down, in the bottom of a 9x13 inch baking dish. Top with half of the Cheddar cheese and half of the Monterey Jack. Layer the remaining bread over the cheese, and top with the other halves of the cheeses. In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs, half-and-half, and milk. Stir in the brown sugar, salt, pepper, cayenne, onion powder, mustard powder, and Worcestershire sauce. Pour over the cheese and bread. Cover, and refrigerate at least 6 hours, preferably overnight. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C).  Bake the strata uncovered for 1 hour in the preheated oven. Let stand for 10 minutes before serving. Slice and garnish with fresh parsley.
Place avocado, ice, sugar, milk, lemon juice, and ice cream into a blender. Puree until smooth.
Generously grease a 9x13-inch glass baking dish with softened butter. Stir together flour and mustard powder. Place ham and Cheddar cubes in a large mixing bowl, sprinkle with flour mixture, and toss until evenly coated. Add bread cubes and toss to mix. In a separate bowl, whisk together eggs, milk, and hot pepper sauce. Pour 1/3 of the bread mixture into the prepared baking dish and smooth out to form a layer. Drizzle with 1 tablespoon of butter, and sprinkle with 1/3 of the Parmesan cheese. Repeat twice more to form three layers. Pour egg mixture overtop, cover with plastic wrap, and refrigerate 8 hours to overnight. The next morning, remove casserole from refrigerator, remove plastic wrap, and allow to stand at room temperature for 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake uncovered in preheated oven until the eggs have set, and the top is golden brown and crispy, about 1 hour.
Cook bacon to desired doneness in a cast iron skillet over the slow burning coals of a campfire.  Remove bacon from the skillet and set aside.  Stir the potatoes and onion into the hot bacon fat.  Cover, and cook until the potatoes are soft, about 10 to 12 minutes. Crumble the bacon into the potatoes.  Stir in the eggs, cover, and cook until set through, about 2 minutes.  Sprinkle with the cheese, and allow to melt before serving.
Lightly grease a 9x13-inch casserole dish. Combine brown sugar, butter, corn syrup, 1/2 cup whole milk, and 1/8 teaspoon salt in a saucepan over medium heat; cook, stirring constantly, until sugar is dissolved and syrup is smooth, about 5 minutes. Pour syrup into the prepared casserole dish. Arrange bread slices atop the syrup layer in the casserole dish. Whisk 2 1/2 cups milk, eggs, vanilla extract, and 1/4 teaspoon salt in a bowl; pour milk mixture over bread. Cover casserole dish with plastic wrap and refrigerate 8 hours or overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove plastic wrap from casserole dish. Mix white sugar and cinnamon together in a small bowl; sprinkle mixture over casserole. Cover casserole with aluminum foil. Bake in the preheated oven for 20 minutes. Remove aluminum foil and continue baking until casserole is cooked through and eggs are set, 25 to 30 minutes.  The casserole will be syrupy, but should thicken as it cools.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 9x9-inch baking dish with cooking spray.
                                    Watch Now Arrange pizza squares in the prepared baking dish. Mix eggs, milk, mozzarella cheese, onion, butter, garlic, oregano, and salt together in a large bowl; pour over pizza pieces. Top with Parmesan cheese and red pepper flakes. Cover dish with aluminum foil.
                                    Watch Now Bake in the preheated oven for 45 minutes. Remove foil and continue baking until eggs are set and Parmesan cheese is melted, about 20 more minutes.
                                    Watch Now
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Arrange hash brown patties in a single layer in the prepared baking dish; top with Canadian bacon. Sprinkle Cheddar-Monterey Jack cheese over Canadian bacon. Whisk egg substitute, milk, salt, and mustard together in a bowl; pour over cheese layer. Cover dish with aluminum foil. Bake in the preheated oven for 1 hour. Remove aluminum foil and bake until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean and edges are golden brown, about 15 minutes.
Place 3 eggs, flour, milk, water, vegetable oil, sugar, salt, and vanilla extract in a blender. Blend until completely smooth, 1 or 2 minutes, scraping down sides as needed. Let batter sit at room temperature 30 minutes. Whisk together ricotta cheese, cream cheese, lemon zest, egg, sugar, and salt in a mixing bowl. Mix together thoroughly. Cover and refrigerate. Heat a 10-inch, non-stick skillet over medium-high heat. Spray or brush lightly with vegetable oil. Pour in about 1/4 cup batter. Immediately swirl batter around to coat bottom of pan. Cook until surface looks dry, about 1 minute. Flip crepe over to briefly cook other side, about 30 seconds. Remove to a plate. Repeat with the rest of batter. Stack crepes. Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Lightly butter a baking dish. Spoon 3 to 4 tablespoons of filling onto the crepe, about an inch from edge nearest you. Fold edge over filling and flatten slightly. Fold in both sides, then roll up crepe into a small filled rectangle, ending with the seam on the bottom, creating a blintz. Melt butter in skillet over medium heat. Cook the blintzes until golden brown on both sides, turning gently, about 2 minutes. Transfer to buttered baking dish. Bake in preheated oven to firm up the filling, about 12 minutes. Cool blintzes 10 minutes before serving. Dust lightly with confectioners' sugar.
Blend spinach, almond milk, peanut butter, chia seeds, and kale together in a blender until smooth. Add banana and blend until smooth.
Mix oats, coconut, pecans, brown sugar, and cinnamon in a small container; top with 1/3 cup milk. Cover and refrigerate for 8 hours or overnight. Stir 1 tablespoon milk  into oat mixture before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease a 9 inch round cake pan. Combine the rice flour, tapioca flour, sugar, baking soda, baking powder, and salt in a large bowl.  In a separate bowl, whisk together egg and buttermilk . Make a well in the center of the dry ingredients and pour in the wet. Stir just until the dry ingredients are moistened. Pour into the cake pan. Bake for 65 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean.  Cool on a wire rack, for 10 minutes before removing from the pan.  Wrap bread in plastic wrap or aluminum foil and let stand overnight for the best flavor.
Mix together mayonnaise and curry powder in a bowl.  Gently stir in eggs, then season to taste with salt and pepper.  Evenly divide between 4 slices of bread, top with remaining 4 slices.
In a large bowl, mix together the flour, cornmeal, salt and baking powder. Add potatoes, 1/3 cup of oil, eggs and onion and mix until evenly blended. Heat 1/4 cup of oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Drop heaping tablespoons of the potatoes into the hot oil, flattening slightly. Cook until browned on the bottom and then flip and cook on the other side. Keep in a warm oven while frying the rest.
In a large glass, layer 1 cup yogurt, 1/2 cup granola and 4 blackberries. Repeat layers.
Heat butter in a skillet over medium-high heat. Beat eggs and water together, then pour into pan. Add feta cheese, and cook, stirring occasionally to scramble. Season with salt and pepper.
Mix the cream cheese with the cilantro in a bowl, adding salt and pepper to taste. Heat one-quarter of the butter in a well-seasoned omelet pan or 8 inch non-stick frying pan over medium-high heat. When the butter is hot and bubbling, swirl it around in the pan. Just before the butter begins to brown, beat 2 of the eggs and pour into pan. Lower the heat. After 10 seconds or so, the omelet will coagulate. Push the omelet to one side of the pan with a spoon or spatula, and let the raw egg run over the cleared skillet. Repeat this one more time, then take the skillet off the heat. Dab one quarter of the herbed cream cheese along the middle of the omelet from one side to the other. Season the omelet with additional salt and pepper to taste. If it has not completely set, place the pan over medium heat for a half minute longer. When the omelet is set, slide it from the pan onto a plate so that the omelet rolls up and the herbed cream cheese runs along the length of the roll. Serve it right away. Make three more omelets the same way, making sure the pan and butter get good and hot before adding the beaten eggs. Serve each one as soon as it is cooked.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In medium bowl, cream together butter and sugar until light and fluffy. Beat in the  egg, orange juice concentrate, and orange zest. Combine the flour and baking powder; mix into the fluffy mixture until blended. Stir in cereal. Drop by teaspoonfuls 2 inches apart on ungreased cookie sheet. Bake 10 to 12 minutes or until edges are golden.  Remove from cookie sheet for cooling.
Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Line the bottom of the dish with 4 tortillas. Sprinkle with 1/3 each of the green onions, olives, chile peppers, pimento peppers, Monterey Jack cheese, and Cheddar cheese. Repeat twice with the remaining ingredients. In a large bowl, beat together eggs, milk, and salsa. Pour over the layered ingredients. Cover with plastic wrap, and refrigerate overnight. Remove the casserole from refrigerator, and remove plastic wrap. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake 45 to 60 minutes in the preheated oven.
Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, reserving 2 tablespoons drippings; set sausage aside. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Add the eggs and green chiles to the skillet; cook, stirring occasionally, until eggs are scrambled and set. Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking pan. Place the tortillas on a counter top or other clean surface. Cover each tortillas with portions on sausage, cheese and eggs. Roll up the tortillas and place them seam side down in the baking dish. Heat reserved sausage drippings in the skillet. Sprinkle on the flour and stir. Add milk, stirring constantly, until the gravy begins to thicken. Pour the gravy on top of the tortilla rolls. Bake in preheated oven for 10 to 15 minutes, until gravy is bubbly.
To make the sauce: In the top of a double boiler, whisk together yogurt, lemon juice, egg yolks, mustard, salt, sugar, pepper and hot sauce. Cook over simmering water while stirring constantly, for 6 to 8 minutes, or until sauce is thick enough to coat the back of the spoon. In a large stock pot heat 2 quarts of salted water to a boil. Carefully break the eggs one at a time into the boiling water. When all the eggs have been added, reduce the heat to medium. When the eggs float to the top, remove them with a slotted spoon and let drain briefly. To assemble final dish: Toast bread slices and place on warm plates. Top each piece of toast with a slice of smoked salmon and a hot poached egg. Drizzle with yogurt sauce; garnish with parsley and capers.
In a medium bowl, stir together the whole wheat flour, rye flour, soy flour, sugar, baking powder, salt and cinnamon. Make a well in the center, and pour in the vanilla, water and soy milk. Mix until all of the dry ingredients have been absorbed, then stir in the pecans. Heat a large skillet or griddle iron over medium heat, and coat with cooking spray. Pour about 1/3 cup of batter onto the hot surface, and spread out to 1/4 inch thickness. Cook until bubbles appear on the surface, then flip and brown on the other side. Serve warm.
Slice the loaf of French bread into about 25 slices, and set aside. In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, and maple syrup. Place enough bread slices in the bottom of a 9x13 inch baking dish to cover. Drop 2 teaspoons or so of cream cheese onto each slice. You do not need to spread the cheese. Repeat layering with bread slices and cream cheese until the dish is filled to the top. Slowly pour the egg mixture over the layers, so it doesn't run over the sides. Cover, and refrigerate 8 hours or overnight. The next morning, preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake casserole for 45 minutes, or until set and golden brown.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a 9x5 inch loaf pan with non-stick spray. Sift together all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, baking soda, baking powder, cinnamon, nutmeg, cloves, and salt in a large bowl until well blended. Beat egg whites with a mixer until light and frothy. Stir in applesauce, brown sugar, zucchini, carrots, and vanilla until well combined. Mix in the raisins and pecans. Add the flour mixture, stirring just until blended. Pour the batter into the prepared pan. Bake until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, about 1 hour 20 minutes. Cool bread in pans for 10 minutes, then remove, and cool completely on a wire rack.
Place the banana, strawberries, almonds, and water into a blender. Blend to mix, then add the ice cubes and puree until smooth. Add the protein powder, and continue mixing until evenly incorporated, about 30 seconds.
First, make the sourdough starter. Crumble the yeast into a large bowl. Whisk in 1 quart of warm water and 2 tablespoons of sugar until dissolved. The water should be just slightly warmer than body temperature. Gradually whisk in 4 cups of flour, continuing to mix until all lumps are gone. Cover with a dish towel, and let sit for 24 hours at room temperature. After 24 hours, stir well, cover, and let stand another 24 hours. It will be a thin, light-colored sourdough which is then ready to use. In a large bowl, stir together the rye flour, 4 cups of all-purpose flour, salt and sugar. Mix in the sourdough starter using a wooden spoon, then stir in 2 cups of warm water. I transfer the dough to a heavy duty stand mixer to mix the first couple of minutes, then it can't handle the heavy dough and I start using my hands by turning the dough out onto a floured surface. A clean countertop works best. Knead the dough, adding a few tablespoons of water at a time if it is too stiff. Fold the dough over, pull it apart, whatever you can do to get it kneaded up good. Total kneading time should be 15 to 20 minutes to get a smooth dough. Place the dough in a large bowl, cover, and let rise until doubled, 1 to 2 hours. When the dough has risen, scrape it out of the bowl and back onto a floured surface. Knead for about 5 minutes. This is important to activate the gluten. Shape into 1 or 2 long loaves. Place on baking sheets, and let rise for about 1 hour, or until your finger leaves an impression when you poke the bread gently. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Bake the bread for about 45 minutes for 2 loaves, 1 1/2 hours if you made one big loaf. Don't worry if the crust is dark. The bread will be delicious and so will the crust. Cool completely before cutting. I always freeze half.
Press lemons, carrots, apples, and beets through a juicer and into a large glass.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease an 8-inch pie dish. Place a steamer insert into a saucepan and fill with water to just below the bottom of the steamer. Bring water to a boil. Add kale, cover, and steam until tender, 3 to 5 minutes. Remove from heat and place in prepared pie dish; add sliced leek and cherry tomatoes. Beat eggs in a bowl; stir in milk and shredded Italian cheese blend, followed by rosemary, sea salt, and ground black pepper. Pour the egg mixture into the pie dish. Stir gently until egg mixture and kale mixture are evenly combined. Bake quiche in preheated oven until the center has set, about 30 minutes. Remove from oven and top with grated Parmesan. Continue baking until quiche is lightly browned on top, about 20 more minutes. Remove from oven and enjoy!
Preheat waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Spray waffle iron with cooking spray. Place shredded potatoes in a bowl. Pour enough cold water over potatoes to cover; soak for 2 to 3 minutes. Drain and rinse to remove starch. Squeeze water out of potatoes by hand or by rolling in a clean kitchen towel and twisting towel to wring out water. Toss potatoes with oil, garlic, salt, pepper, and paprika in a bowl until evenly coated. Stir eggs into potato mixture. Spoon half the potato mixture into preheated waffle iron; cook until potatoes are tender and golden brown, 5 to 8 minutes. Repeat with remaining potato mixture.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8x11-inch casserole dish with cooking spray. Mix hash browns, eggs, ham, Cheddar-Jack cheese, onion powder, salt, and pepper together. Pour mixture into the prepared dish. Shake dish gently from side to side to level out ingredients. Bake, uncovered, in the preheated oven until top starts to brown, about 40 minutes. Cool before cutting into bars.
Oil bottom and sides of a 9x13-inch baking dish with about a tablespoon of bacon fat. Place bread cubes in a large mixing bowl. Crack eggs into a separate mixing bowl. Season with salt, pepper, cayenne, and nutmeg. Add cream and whisk mixture thoroughly. Pour egg/cream mixture over the bread cubes and mix to distribute ingredients evenly. Allow bread mixture to sit about 15 minutes to absorb the liquid. Transfer half of the bread mixture to the baking pan; spread evenly over the bottom and press mixture down a bit. Top with half of the grated Cheddar cheese. Add cooked bacon pieces in an even layer over the cheese. Place the cooked spinach over the bacon; top with half of the remaining cheese. Finish with the rest of the soaked bread cubes, spread evenly and pressed down slightly. Sprinkle with the rest of the grated cheese. Cover and let strata sit at room temperature for 1 hour before baking. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake strata in preheated oven until set, about 45 minutes. Optionally, you can broil the strata for a minute or two to brown the top.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Prepare 12 muffin cups with cooking spray. Arrange bacon on a microwave-safe plate. Cook bacon in microwave for 75 seconds. Place a slice of bacon into each muffin cup so that the bacon lines the edges of the cup. Beat eggs and milk together in a bowl; ladle into muffin cups. Top 4 of the egg portions with 1 tablespoon each of the green onion, 4 with 1 tablespoon each jalapeno pepper, and 4 each with 1 tablespoon roasted red pepper. Bake in preheated oven until only slightly moist on top, about 20 minutes. Season the muffins with salt and pepper; top with Cheddar cheese. Continue baking until the cheese melts, about 5 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Melt butter in an oven-safe skillet over medium heat; cook and stir apple slices, about 1/4 cup sugar, and cinnamon in butter until apples are tender, about 5 minutes. Beat eggs, milk, flour, remaining 1/4 cup sugar, baking powder, vanilla extract, and salt in a large bowl until batter is smooth; pour batter evenly over apples. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, about 10 minutes. Run a spatula around the edges of the pancake to loosen. Invert skillet over a large plate to serve.
Put spinach, banana, carrot, yogurt, ice, and honey in a blender; blend until smooth.
Combine water, applesauce, oats, carrots, pineapple, raisins, sweetener, cinnamon, pumpkin pie spice, and salt in the crock of a 7-quart or larger slow cooker. Cook on Low for 6 hours.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease an 8x10-inch baking pan. Mix oats, brown sugar, flax seed meal, flour, baking powder, cinnamon, and salt together in a bowl. Mix banana, rice milk, egg, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Pour banana mixture into flour mixture; stir to combine. Pour batter into the prepared baking pan. Bake brownies in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, about 20 minutes. Cover pan with a towel to hold in moisture and cool brownies for at least 5 minutes before serving.
Bring polenta, water, and salt to a boil in a saucepan; reduce heat to low and simmer until polenta is thickened, 10 to 15 minutes. Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat and cook kielbasa sausage until browned, 5 to 8 minutes; stir in garlic, rosemary, and red pepper flakes and cook, stirring often, until garlic is fragrant, about 1 minute. Mix in shrimp and stir gently until shrimp are pink and no longer translucent inside, about 5 minutes. Transfer shrimp mixture and any pan juices to a large serving bowl and stir grits into the mixture. Stir Cheddar cheese into the hot mixture until melted.
Preheat the oven's broiler and set the oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source. Remove all visible seeds from the grapefruit and loosen sections from membrane with a sharp knife. Place grapefruit halves cut side up in a baking dish. Stir the oats, brown sugar, cinnamon, and salt together in a small bowl; add the butter and mash with a fork to incorporate oat mixture into the butter. Spread about half of the butter mixture over the top of each grapefruit half. Cook under the broiler until the topping is golden brown, about 10 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly spray a 9x12-inch baking sheet with cooking spray. Cook the bacon in a large skillet over medium heat, stirring often, until the bacon is browned and crisp, about 10 minutes. Remove bacon pieces with a slotted spoon, and drain on paper towels. Open up the cans of biscuits, separate the biscuits, and arrange onto the prepared baking sheet so they touch. Press the biscuit dough down to seal them together into a crust that covers the baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until the crust is slightly cooked and very lightly browned, about 5 minutes. Do not overbake. Remove from oven. Melt the butter in a large nonstick skillet over medium heat until the foam disappears. Beat the eggs in a bowl,  and pour the eggs into the hot skillet. Use a spatula to lift and gently stir the eggs just until set, but still moist, 3 to 4 minutes. Arrange the lightly scrambled eggs on the semi-baked biscuit crust. Top with the cooked bacon, onion, and green pepper; spread the Cheddar cheese all over the pizza. Season to taste with salt and black pepper. Return to oven, and bake on the top rack until the cheese is melted and bubbling and has begun to brown, about 10 more minutes.
Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Spray a 9x5-inch loaf pan with cooking spray. Mix butter and sugar in a large bowl until light and fluffy. Whisk in eggs one at a time until combined. Whisk in the pumpkin puree, cinnamon, Chinese five-spice powder, and allspice until combined. Stir flour, salt, baking powder, and baking soda into the pumpkin mixture and mix until just combined. Stir in chopped walnuts. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 1 hour.
Heat a large skillet over medium heat. Add the sausage and cook until browned, about 5 minutes. Remove from the skillet, reserving the drippings. Add the onion and green pepper to the drippings in the skillet. Cook and stir over medium heat until tender but still crisp. Stir in the hash browns and cook for about 5 minutes, until browned. Return sausage to the skillet, season with salt and pepper. Heat through and serve.
Beat the eggs in a mixing bowl; stir in the milk, vegetable oil, and salt. Whisk in the rice flour until no dry lumps remain. Cover the bowl and let stand at room temperature for 1 hour or in the refrigerator overnight. Heat a lightly-oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry. Flip and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter.
In a saucepan, combine water, oats and salt. Simmer 5 minutes uncovered, stirring occasionally. Remove from heat, cover, and let stand 3 minutes. Stir in brown sugar, banana and chocolate chips.
In a large bowl, mix together flour, baking powder, salt and dry milk. Cut in shortening until mixture resembles coarse cornmeal.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Grease a 10x15 inch jellyroll pan. Place sausages in a skillet and cook over medium-high heat until evenly browned. Drain on paper towels. Sift together the flour, baking powder, white sugar, and salt; set aside. In a large mixing bowl, beat eggs until light and fluffy. Add milk and shortening; mix well. Gradually stir in dry ingredients until smooth. Pour the batter into the prepared jelly roll pan. Arrange sausages on top of the batter. Bake in preheated oven until pancakes are golden brown and cooked through, about 15 minutes. Cut into 10 pieces and serve hot with butter and syrup.
Break eggs into mixing bowl. Stir in water, garlic powder, mayonnaise,  white wine, salt and pepper.  Mix well with a wire whisk. Stir in cheddar cheese. Heat a nonstick pan over medium heat. Pour in egg mixture and cook, stirring occasionally, until well cooked. The eggs should be firm, but not hard. These eggs will have a softer texture than normal scrambled eggs. Serve warm.
In a large mixing bowl, combine flour, graham cracker crumbs, brown sugar, baking powder, salt and pecans (if desired). In a separate bowl, stir together milk, butter and egg. Add to the flour mixture and stir well. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). In a large bowl, mix together flour, 1/2 cup oats, salt, baking powder, and baking soda. In another bowl, mix together sour cream, milk, honey, and sugar.  Add to the flour mixture, and mix just until well blended.  Stir in melted butter or margarine. Turn dough onto a lightly sprayed baking sheet.  Shape into a round, lightly mounded circle, about 8 inches diameter.  Brush the top of the loaf with melted butter or margarine, and sprinkle with remaining 1 tablespoon oats.  With a knife, score the top of the loaf into quarters. Bake for about 40 minutes, or until browned.  Cool completely before slicing.
Mix the oats and water and microwave on medium power for 5 minutes.  Stir in the honey, wheat germ, and flax oil.  Top with the soy milk.
In a shallow bowl, whisk together the eggs, sweetened condensed milk and vanilla with a fork. Set aside. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Slice banana bread into 4 thick slices. Dip each slice into the egg mixture, then place in the hot pan. Cook on each side until golden brown. Dust with confectioners' sugar just before serving, if desired.
Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Cook the sausage in a large skillet over medium-high heat, stirring until the sausage is crumbly and lightly browned. Drain off the grease and place the sausage in a bowl. Meanwhile, bring the water to a boil in a large saucepan over high heat. Stir in the grits, and reduce heat to medium-low. Cook and stir constantly for 5 minutes until the grits are tender, or follow package directions. Stir together the sausage, cheese, butter, hot pepper sauce, and eggs. Fold in the grits until combined, then spread into an ungreased, small casserole dish. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown on top, 30 to 40 minutes.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F.  Toss apples with sugar and cinnamon; set aside. Beat eggs, milk and vanilla in large bowl with wire whisk until well blended.  Add bread cubes, sausage and 1 1/2 cups cheese and apple mixture; stir gently until evenly coated. Spoon into lightly greased 13x9-inch baking dish; top with remaining 1/2 cup cheese. Bake 40-45 minutes or until knife inserted in center comes out clean.   Let stand 10 minutes before cutting into 12 squares to serve. Serve with warm maple syrup.
Heat the bacon drippings in a large skillet over medium heat. Add potatoes and onion, and stir to coat. Cook, stirring occasionally, until potatoes are tender and golden brown, about 15 minutes. Season with salt and pepper, and serve.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). To make the gravy:  Crumble sausage in skillet and cook over medium-low heat.  Add onion and cook until tender; drain. Stir in flour, a little at a time, for about 6 minutes or until bubbly and golden.   Stir in milk, nutmeg, poultry seasoning, salt, Worcestershire sauce, hot pepper sauce and cook until thick. To make biscuits:  Dissolve yeast in warm water; let stand 5 minutes.  Stir in buttermilk and set aside.  In a large bowl, combine flour, sugar, baking powder, soda and salt.  Cut in shortening with pastry blender until looks like coarse meal.  Stir in yeast-buttermilk mix and mix well.  Turn out onto lightly floured surface and knead gently 3 to 4 times.  Roll out flat to 1/2 inch and cut with 2 1/2 inch biscuit cutter.  Place on lightly greased baking sheet and cover.  Let rise in warm place 1 1/2 hrs. Bake in preheated oven for 8 to 10 minutes, until golden.  Remove from oven and brush tops with melted butter.
Place ingredients into the pan of the bread machine in the order suggested by the manufacturer.  Select the White Bread or Basic cycle, and Start.
Blend blueberries, yogurt, orange juice, sugar, vanilla extract, and cinnamon together in a blender on low speed for 30 seconds; increase speed to high and blend until smooth, about 2 minutes. Add ice and blend on high until smooth, about 1 minute more.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Spray a 9x13-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Arrange bacon slices in a single layer on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until browned and crisp, 20 to 25 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels and transfer 1 to 2 tablespoons bacon grease to a skillet, reserving the remaining bacon grease. Add butter to skillet. Cook and stir potatoes in the hot bacon grease-butter until lightly browned, about 10 minutes; season with salt and black pepper. Transfer potatoes to the prepared baking dish. Heat about 1 tablespoon reserved bacon grease in the skillet over medium heat; cook and stir mushrooms until softened, 5 to 10 minutes. Layer mushrooms over potatoes. Place green onions in the same skillet and remove from heat. Allow green onions to soften from the residual heat in skillet; layer over mushrooms. Crumble bacon over green onion layer; top with 1 cup Cheddar cheese. Blend eggs, milk, and 1 teaspoon salt in a blender until smooth; pour over Cheddar cheese layer. Top casserole with remaining 1 cup Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until casserole is set and a knife inserted in the middle comes out clean, 30 to 40 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Heat a lightly oiled skillet over medium high heat. Add the potatoes and cook for 10 minutes, until lightly brown. Layer in bottom of prepared pan. Add butter to skillet and saute broccoli and onions until soft; spoon over potatoes. Spread ham on top of broccoli and onions. In a large bowl, beat together eggs and cheese. Season with salt and pepper and pour over vegetables. Bake in preheated oven until eggs are set and lightly brown on top, about 20 to 30 minutes. Serve warm.
In a small bowl, combine the garlic, yogurt and pinch of salt; mix well. In a large saucepan or stockpot, combine water, vinegar and 1 teaspoon salt; bring to a boil over high heat. When the water is boiling hard, reduce the heat and gently break the eggs into the water, spacing them well apart. Cook until the whites have set over the yolks, immediately remove the eggs with a slotted spoon and place on a serving dish. Melt butter in a small skillet or saucepan. Stir in paprika. Pour yogurt sauce over eggs and top with paprika butter. Your cilbir is ready!
Combine flour, baking powder, brown sugar, and salt in a large bowl.  Mix in the peanut butter until the texture resembles cornmeal.  Add milk and vanilla; stir just until blended.  Stir in the banana pieces. Heat a large skillet over medium heat, and coat with cooking spray.  Spoon batter onto the skillet, using approximately 2 tablespoons to form each silver dollar pancake.  Cook until pancakes are golden brown on both sides; serve hot.
Whisk together the pancake mix, skim milk, and ricotta in a bowl until smooth. Batter should be thick; add more milk if necessary to get desired consistency. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Open the cans of crescent rolls, unroll the dough, and place the dough into the bottom of an 11x15-inch baking pan. Do not separate the rolls. Press the edges of the dough up the sides of the pan to make a shallow crust. Spread the honey mustard over the dough. Place the zucchini and a few tablespoons of water into a saucepan over medium heat, cover, and bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low, and cook the zucchini until tender, about 15 minutes. Drain and set the zucchini aside. Place the onion in a large skillet with butter over medium heat, and cook and stir until the onion is translucent, 5 to 8 minutes. Stir the cooked zucchini and chicken into the onion, and mix well. Let the mixture heat for about 5 minutes, stirring occasionally. Spread the zucchini mixture in an even layer over the crust. In a bowl, beat the eggs with salt, black pepper, basil, oregano, and garlic powder; pour the egg mixture over the zucchini. Sprinkle the cheese over the top. Bake in the preheated oven until the egg mixture is set and the cheese is browned and bubbling, about 20 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Cook and stir bacon and onion in a skillet over medium heat until the bacon is crisp, 10 to 15 minutes. Drain grease, reserving the drippings. Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish with the reserved bacon grease. Combine the cooked bacon and onion, eggs, hash brown potatoes, Cheddar cheese, cottage cheese, Swiss cheese, bell pepper, and green chilies in the prepared baking dish; stir to combine. Bake in preheated oven until the eggs are set firm, 35 to 40 minutes. Let casserole cool 10 minutes before cutting to serve.
Lightly grease 2 round cake pans with butter. Roll bread dough out to an 18x6-inch rectangle and brush with melted butter. Mix brown sugar, walnuts, and cinnamon in a bowl; sprinkle over dough. Roll dough into a log, starting at the long edge. Moisten edge with a little water; seal the edge. Cut log into 20 slices; arrange rolls, cut sides down, in prepared cake pans. Cover with a towel and let rise in a warm place until doubled in volume, about 1 1/2 hours. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Pour heavy cream over dough. Bake in preheated oven until golden brown, about 25 minutes. Stir confectioners' sugar, milk, and vanilla extract in a bowl until smooth, adding more milk or sugar as needed so the mixture is easily drizzled. Drizzle over warm cinnamon rolls to serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 9x5-inch loaf pans. Beat sugar, oil, eggs, and vanilla extract together in a bowl until smooth; fold in zucchini. Stir flour, cinnamon, salt, baking soda, nutmeg, baking powder, and cloves together in a separate bowl; gradually stir into sugar mixture until batter is mixed. Fold walnuts and raisins into the batter; pour into the prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of the bread comes out clean, about 50 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease 36 muffin cups or line with paper liners. Mix bananas, white sugar, zucchini, applesauce, eggs, brown sugar, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Combine all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, cinnamon, salt, baking soda, and baking powder in a sifter and sift into the banana mixture; add oats and mix until batter is just combined. Fill muffin cups with batter. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of a muffin comes out clean, about 20 minutes. Cool muffins completely in the tin before removing.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a loaf pan. Mash thawed raspberries in a bowl with a fork; press raspberries through a sieve to remove seeds. Mash banana in another bowl with a fork. Combine flour, cinnamon, baking soda, salt, and nutmeg in a bowl. Beat sugar, eggs, raspberries, banana, and vegetable oil in a bowl with an electric mixer set on low until smooth, 2 to 3 minutes. Stir flour mixture into raspberry mixture until batter is just moistened; stir in lemon extract. Pour batter into prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 1 hour. Cool in the pan for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease 2 9x5-inch loaf pans.  Set aside. Sift the flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a bowl. Set aside. Beat the butter and sugar with an electric mixer in a large bowl until light and fluffy. The mixture should be noticeably lighter in color. Beat in the egg, then stir in the mashed bananas. Pour in the flour mixture, mixing until just incorporated. Fold in the butterscotch chips and walnuts; mixing just enough to evenly combine. Pour the batter evenly into the prepared pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 25 to 28 minutes. Cool in the pans for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Beat eggs in a large mixing bowl, then add yogurt, flour, baking powder, baking soda, kosher salt, and shortening, mixing until smooth. Pour batter onto hot waffle iron. Cook until no longer steaming, about 5 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 9 inch pie plate. Whisk the eggs in a large bowl. Stir in the milk and flour, then mix in the green chilies and cheese. Pour into the prepared pie plate. Bake in the preheated oven until the center is set, about 35 minutes.
Prepare a skillet with cooking spray and place over medium-high heat. Whisk together the muffin mix, flour, baking powder, egg, milk, and cooking oil until smooth. Pour 1/4 cup of batter into skillet. Cook pancake until bubbles form on top and bottom is golden brown, 1 to 2 minutes; flip and cook until bottom side reaches same golden-brown color of top of pancake. Repeat until batter is completely used.
Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Fry onion in oil until translucent. Transfer to a medium bowl, and mix with mashed potatoes and corned beef. Season with salt and pepper. Form into 8 patties. Fry patties in the skillet over medium-high heat until golden brown on both sides.
Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. In a large bowl, combine flour, sugar, baking powder and salt. Stir in egg, buttermilk and oil until mixture is smooth. Pour the batter by spoonfuls into the hot pan, forming 5 inch circles. When the edges appear to harden, flip the pancakes. Cook on both sides until golden brown. Serve hot.
In a blender combine milk, jelly, peanut butter, banana, honey and wheat germ. Blend until smooth.
In a large bowl, beat together eggs and milk. Stir in cinnamon and nutmeg. Heat a non-stick skillet to medium heat. Dip the bread slices in the egg mixture, place in the skillet and cook until lightly brown on both sides. Remove bread from skillet. Layer four slices of bread with a slice of Swiss cheese, ham, Swiss cheese, turkey and Swiss cheese again. Cover with remaining four bread slices. Return sandwiches to skillet; grill until cheese has melted and bread has browned. Serve hot.
Place milk, sugar, flour, eggs, baking powder, vanilla and oil in a blender; puree until smooth. Lightly butter 6 inch skillet; heat over medium heat.  For each crepe, pour 1/4 cup batter into skillet; immediately rotate skillet until batter covers bottom.  Cook until light brown.  Run spatula around edge to loosen; turn and cook other side until light brown.  Stack crepes, placing waxed paper between each; keep covered until ready to serve.
Heat oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add onion and garlic, and cook until fragrant. Stir in the tomatoes and potatoes, and cook for 7 to 10 minutes until potatoes are softened.  Add the corned beef, and flake into pieces. Cook for another 10 minutes, stirring frequently. Season with salt and pepper, and serve.
Heat a 12-inch non-stick skillet over low heat. (Use a 10-inch skillet if you halve the recipe to serve 2 instead of 4.) Meanwhile, in a small bowl, mix tomatoes, 1/2 tsp. oregano, 1/4 tsp. salt, and pepper to taste. Stir in feta. In a medium bowl, whisk eggs together, then stir in spinach, 1/2 tsp. oregano, 1/4 tsp. salt, and pepper to taste. A few minutes before cooking omelet, add oil to the pan, and increase heat to medium-high. Heat until wisps of smoke start to rise from the pan. Add the egg mixture to the skillet. Using a plastic or wooden spatula to push back the eggs that have set, tilt the pan and let the uncooked egg mixture run onto the empty portion of the pan. Continue pushing back cooked eggs, tilting the pan and letting uncooked egg mixture flow onto the empty portion of the pan until omelet is moist but fully cooked, about 3 minutes. Reduce heat to low; pour the tomato mixture over half of the omelet. Using a slotted, flat spatula or turner, carefully fold the untopped half over the filling. Use the turner to slide the omelet onto a cutting board. Let stand a minute or two for the filling to warm. Cut the omelet into 4 wedges and serve immediately.
Cut 3 strawberries into small pieces and set aside. In a blender, place the remaining strawberries and sugar; blend on high speed for 30 seconds. Pour in the milk and blend another 30 seconds. Add the yogurt and blend on high speed for 1 minute. To serve, place 1 ice cube in each of 3 glasses and pour in the lassi. Top with the strawberry pieces and serve.
In a  pot, cover potatoes with water and bring to a boil over high heat. Simmer on medium-high heat until the center of the potatoes are tender when pricked with a fork, about 20 minutes. Turn off heat. Drain, return potatoes to pot and allow to completely dry out over remaining heat. Mash with a potato masher until smooth. Place warm mashed potato in medium bowl. Stir in flour, salt and melted butter. Mix lightly until dough forms. On a well floured surface, knead the dough lightly. The dough will be sticky. Use a floured rolling pin to flatten into a 9 inch circle about 1/4 inch thick. Cut into quarters using a floured knife. Sprinkle a little flour into the base of the skillet and cook the farls for 3 minutes on each side or until evenly browned. Season with a little salt and serve straight away.
Place the shredded potatoes in a bowl, cover with water, and set aside. Bring the onion, garlic, green chiles, and chicken broth to a boil in a saucepan over high heat. Reduce the heat to low, and simmer until the sauce thickens; turn off the heat. Meanwhile, place the strips of bacon on paper towels on a microwave-safe plate, and cook on High until crisp, about 1 minute per strip; set aside. Heat the vegetable oil over medium-high heat in a large skillet. Drain the potatoes, and add to the skillet. Spoon hot oil over the potatoes; sprinkle with the onion powder, salt, and pepper. Flip the potatoes occasionally, but let them fry until crispy bits form and the potatoes are cooked through, about 15 minutes. Place the tortillas between two damp paper towels. Microwave on High until warm, about 30 seconds. Spray a separate skillet with butter flavored cooking spray and cook the eggs over medium heat, whisking them continuously until the eggs are completely set; turn off the heat. Lay a tortilla flat in front of you. Place some potatoes, scrambled egg, and a strip of bacon on the lower third,  leaving about an inch of room from the bottom, and about 1-1/2 inches on the left and right clear for folding the burrito. Spoon on a little of the green chile sauce, and sprinkle with Cheddar cheese. Fold the left and right edges into the middle about 1-1/2 to 2 inches. Take the bottom edge closest to you with the stuffing and pick it up, pulling it OVER the filling, while keeping the sides in place until that edge now touches the tortilla about 7/8 of the way up to the top edge. Check to see that the sides are still tucked well. If they aren't slide them in a bit now that you have the filling covered. Finish by tucking the bottom flap that you pulled over the filling UNDER the filling a bit to seal it, then continue rolling the burrito up to the top edge, forming a tight cylinder.  Let it rest seam-side down, and it will stay nice and tight. Repeat with remaining ingredients.
Beat egg and egg whites in a small bowl. Mix in Parmesan cheese, Cheddar cheese, salt, red pepper flakes, garlic powder, nutmeg, and pepper. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir mushrooms, green onion, and bell pepper until tender, about 5 minutes. Place spinach in skillet and cook until just wilted. Stir in diced tomato and egg mixture; as eggs set, lift edges, letting uncooked portion flow underneath. Cook until egg mixture sets, 10 to 15 minutes; cut into wedges and serve immediately.
Place pineapple, kale, and banana in a NutriBullet(R) or blender; add almond milk. Blend until smooth.
Mix flour, walnuts, sugar, baking powder, nutmeg, cinnamon, baking soda, and salt in a large bowl; make a well in the center. Whisk almond milk, bananas, melted butter, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl until smooth. Whisk in egg. Pour mixture into the well in the flour mixture; stir until just combined. Heat a lightly oiled skillet over medium-high heat. Drop 1/4 cup batter into the skillet; tilt gently to spread batter evenly. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are firm, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend coffee, coconut oil, and butter together in a blender until oil and butter are melted and coffee is frothy.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat and stir in sausage. Cook and stir until sausage is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink, about 10 minutes. Drain and discard any excess grease. Beat eggs in a large bowl; stir in milk, salt, and mustard. Fold bread cubes, Cheddar cheese, and sausage into egg mixture. Pour into a lightly greased 7x11-inch baking dish. Cover and refrigerate for 8 hours or overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove casserole from the refrigerator 30 minutes before baking. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted near the center comes out clean, about 40 minutes.
Sift flour, baking powder, salt, and sugar together in a large bowl. Make a well in the center and pour in milk, egg whites, and melted butter; mix until smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium-high heat. Using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake, pour or scoop batter onto griddle. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Mix pumpkin puree, almond milk, eggs, maple syrup, and vanilla extract together in a bowl until smooth. Whisk coconut flour, baking soda, salt, almond meal, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves together in a separate bowl. Stir pumpkin mixture and flour mixture together in a pourable container until well incorporated. Allow batter to sit for 3 minutes. Heat vegetable oil in a skillet over low heat. Pour silver dollar-sized circles of batter into the hot oil. Cook until lightly browned, about 5 minutes per side.
Bake biscuits as directed on can. Meanwhile, microwave bacon as directed on package. Split warm biscuits; top bottom half of each with scrambled eggs, bacon and cheese. Cover with top halves of biscuits.
Heat vegetable oil in a griddle or shallow frying pan over medium heat. Whisk flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl; stir eggnog into flour mixture until batter is smooth. Pour enough batter into the heated griddle to make a 4- to 5-inch circle. Cook until bubbles appear around the edges and bottom is browned, about 5 minutes. Flip and cook until other side is evenly browned, about 5 more minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat an oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Line pie pan with pie crust, and place a double layer of aluminum foil over the crust.  Bake in the preheated oven for 5 minutes, and then remove foil. Continue baking until crust begins to set, about 5 to 7 minutes; remove from oven. Reduce oven temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a mixing bowl, beat eggs with milk and flour. Stir in onion, mushrooms, spinach, broccoli, and feta cheese. Season with salt and pepper. Pour mixture into hot crust. Bake quiche at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 45 minutes to one hour. Quiche is done when knife inserted in center comes out clean.  Cover edges of crust with foil if crusts begin to brown too quickly.
Preheat an oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Place the eggs, milk, vanilla extract, sugar, salt, and flour into a blender. Pulse until no dry lumps remain in the batter. Melt the butter in an 8-inch, cast iron skillet over medium-high heat. Pour in the batter, and drop in the strawberries. Place the skillet into the oven, and bake until puffed and golden, 20 to 25 minutes. Remove from the oven and serve immediately.
Prepare the mascarpone glaze by whisking together the mascarpone cheese, 1/4 cup creme fraiche, 2 tablespoons white sugar, 1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract, and lemon zest in a bowl until smooth. Set aside. Prepare the pancake batter by whisking the flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, 3 tablespoon sugar, and cocoa powder together in a bowl; set aside. Beat the egg in a separate bowl with the buttermilk, 1/4 cup creme fraiche, red food coloring, and 1 teaspoon vanilla extract until smooth. Stir in the flour mixture until moistened, then add the melted butter, and continue stirring until only small lumps of flour remain. If batter appears a little thick, add more buttermilk. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter. Drizzle pancakes with the mascarpone glaze to serve.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Pour the oil into the bottom of a baking dish, and arrange the sausages over it in a single layer. Bake for 10 minutes in the preheated oven. Meanwhile, in a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, eggs, and half of the milk until smooth. Gradually mix in the rest of the milk until a smooth batter is achieved. Season with salt and pepper. Remove the sausages from the oven, and ladle the batter over them until the sausages are 3/4 covered. Return to the oven, and bake for 35 minutes, or until the center is risen and browned. Don't worry if the underside seems slightly soft, as this is normal.
Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Prepare a baking dish with cooking spray. Preheat the baking dish in the oven. Brown the sausage in a skillet over medium heat; drain. Mix the flour, white sugar, brown sugar, baking powder, and salt in a large bowl. Stir in the eggs, milk, vegetable oil, and vanilla to form a batter. Add the sausage and stir. Pour into the preheated baking dish. Bake until a toothpick inserted into the center of the dish comes out clean, about 25 minutes. Allow to cool 10 minutes before cutting to serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake pie crust until lightly browned.  Meanwhile, place spinach and Swiss chard  in a steamer over 1 inch of boiling water, and cover. Lightly cook, about 5 minutes. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat and saute onions and garlic.  When onions become transparent add spinach and chard.  Stir in curry powder, parsley, salt and pepper.  Saute until spinach and chard reduce, then add mushrooms and capers.  Stir and remove from heat. In a blender or food processor, combine tofu, milk, nutmeg, cinnamon, cardamom and Parmesan cheese.  Process until smooth and creamy.  Pour over vegetables and mix well.  Transfer mixture to the pie crust. Bake in preheated oven for 20 minutes.  Remove from oven and sprinkle top with Cheddar cheese.  Bake for 10 more minutes, or until cheese is lightly browned.
In a medium bowl, mix together milk, water, melted butter, and vanilla extract. In a small bowl, thoroughly mix flour, sugar, and salt. Whisk flour mixture into milk mixture until batter is smooth. Cover and refrigerate 2 hours. Warm a medium skillet over medium-high heat. Coat pan with a small amount of vegetable oil and pour in about 2 tablespoons of crepe batter. Swirl pan to allow batter to spread out thinly. Cook until edges are crispy and golden, then flip to cook other side until lightly browned. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Spread crust into a 10 inch deep dish pie plate. Arrange chicken evenly over the crust. Cover with Gruyere cheese. In a small bowl, beat eggs with a fork; stir in milk, onion soup mix and Parmesan cheese. Pour mixture into pie crust and sprinkle with paprika to taste. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes, then lower heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and bake for 30 more minutes. Let cool for 10 minutes and serve.
Beat together eggs and milk. Heat a lightly oiled skillet (or non-stick pan) over medium high heat and cook egg mixture, stirring occasionally, until firm. When almost done, stir in ham, green onions, salt and pepper. Spoon 1/4 of the egg mixture on top of each tortilla. Sprinkle the eggs with cheese, fold over the tortilla to make a roll and top with salsa if desired.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking pan. Mix baking mix, 1 cup Cheddar cheese, milk, maple syrup, eggs, and sugar together in a bowl; pour into prepared pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, 20 to 25 minutes. Sprinkle bacon and remaining 1 cup Cheddar cheese over casserole; return to oven until cheese is melted, about 5 more minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat butter in a large oven-safe skillet over high heat. Toss spinach in hot butter until wilted, about 30 seconds. Drain spinach well and squeeze it as dry as possible. Transfer to a cutting board and chop. Beat eggs in a bowl with salt, black pepper, and cayenne pepper until thoroughly combined. Place bacon in the same skillet used to cook spinach and cook over medium-high heat, stirring occasionally, until bacon has rendered its fat and is almost crisp, 5 to 8 minutes. Use a paper towel held in a tongs to remove excess bacon grease. Reduce heat to medium; saute onion with bacon and a pinch of salt until onion is translucent, about 5 more minutes. Saute chopped spinach with bacon and onion until spinach is hot; pour in eggs. Use a wooden spoon to distribute spinach evenly throughout the eggs. Sprinkle feta cheese over mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set, 10 to 15 minutes. Top may still be a little wet. Turn on oven's broiler. Broil pie until top is lightly golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes.
Lightly grease 2 microwave-safe ramekins. Stir almond flour, flax meal, egg, coconut oil, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt in a bowl. Divide almond mixture between ramekins. Heat ramekins in the microwave for 30 seconds; let rest 5 seconds. Heat ramekins for an additional 30 seconds until muffins are risen and cooked. Remove from microwave and flip upside-down onto a plate to cool.
Sift flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Beat egg into milk in a separate bowl until thoroughly combined. Pour melted butter into flour mixture; whisk in milk mixture to make a smooth batter. Fold chocolate chips into batter. Heat a small nonstick skillet over low heat; pour about 1/3 cup of batter into hot skillet and cover with a lid. Cook pancake until browned on the bottom, about 3 minutes; flip pancake and cook covered until other side is browned. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a 9x5-inch loaf pan baking parchment. Stir almond flour, coconut flour, pumpkin pie spice, baking soda, baking powder, and kosher salt together in a bowl with a whisk to mix. Beat pumpkin puree, eggs, maple syrup, coconut oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl until smooth; add to the flour mixture and gently stir just until the dry ingredients are moistened. Pour the batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 55 to 70 minutes. Cool in the pan 15 to 20 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Scrub the potatoes well and pierce with a fork. Cook on full power in microwave oven for 5 minutes; turn the potatoes over and cook 5 more minutes. Remove the potatoes from the oven and set aside to cool. Thinly slice the cooled potatoes. Cook and stir the butter and onion in a large skillet over medium heat until the onion is translucent, about 5 minutes. Gently place the potatoes into the skillet and fry, carefully flipping the potatoes a few times, until slices are browned around the edges. Sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Bring water and 1 pinch of salt to a boil in a saucepan and slowly mix in the grits, stirring constantly. Reduce heat to low and simmer grits until tender and smooth, about 20 minutes; stir often. Set aside and keep warm. Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir tasso ham until crisp. Stir in onion and green bell pepper and cook until onion is translucent, about 4 minutes. Lightly stir the shrimp with the vegetables and olive oil just until pink, 30 to 45 seconds; remove shrimp from pan and set aside. Pour white wine into the skillet and stir, dissolving any browned bits of food in the bottom of the skillet; slowly add the cream, reduce heat to low, and simmer until thickened, about 10 minutes. Season with salt and black pepper. Divide the grits onto 2 serving plates and line the edge of each plate with 10 shrimp. Pour cream sauce over grits and sprinkle each serving with chopped green onion tops.
Bring chicken broth and evaporated milk to a boil in a large saucepan; stir in grits and salt and return to a boil. Reduce heat to low, cover, and simmer grits until thick, stirring often, about 5 minutes. Stir in 1 cup Cheddar cheese until melted. Set grits aside and keep warm. Cook and stir bacon in a large skillet over medium heat until crisp, 8 to 10 minutes. Transfer bacon to a bowl. Drain all but 2 tablespoons of bacon drippings from the skillet and cook and stir shrimp, green bell pepper, and onion in bacon drippings until shrimp are bright pink and no longer translucent inside and green pepper is tender, 5 to 8 minutes. Stir bacon into shrimp mixture. Spread grits into a serving dish, top with shrimp mixture, and sprinkle with 1 tablespoon Cheddar cheese for garnish.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). In a large cast iron skillet, heat butter and apples together in oven while preheating. Cook, stirring occasionally, until apples begin to soften. While apples are cooking, place eggs, flour and milk in a blender or food processor and puree until smooth. Pour batter over apples in preheated skillet and stir briefly to blend with apples. Return skillet to oven and cook for 15 minutes. Reduce heat to 375 degrees and bake for 10 more minutes, until golden brown.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Combine flour, beer, butter, milk, egg yolks, honey, and vanilla in a large bowl; stir until the mixture is smooth. In a separate bowl, beat egg whites until stiff peaks form. Gently fold egg whites into batter. Spray preheated waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray. Ladle the batter into waffle iron. Cook the waffles until golden and crisp. Serve immediately.
Whisk together the eggs, milk, onions, salt, and pepper in a large bowl until it looks slightly fluffy. Melt the butter in a large pan over medium to high heat; coat the pan evenly with the butter.  Stir in eggs and continue stirring until they have just cooked.  Serve immediately.
Whisk together egg, oil, and milk until smooth. Sift together flour, baking soda, and salt; add to egg mixture along with brown sugar, and oatmeal; stir until just combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or spoon the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Prick bottom and sides of pie crust and bake 10 minutes, until lightly brown; set aside to cool. Place bacon in a skillet over medium-high heat and cook until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. In a bowl, mix eggs, milk, mustard and nutmeg. In a separate bowl, toss bacon with flour to lightly coat. Spread 3/4 bacon mixture and Swiss cheese over bottom of pie crust. Pour egg mixture over bacon mixture. Top with remaining bacon mixture. Bake 1 hour in the preheated oven, or until a fork inserted in the center comes out clean. Cool 10 minutes before serving.
In a small bowl, beat eggs and pepper together. In another small bowl, combine crumbled cheese with milk. Heat oil in a large non-stick skillet over medium-high heat. Pour in eggs, and tilt pan until bottom is evenly covered. When edges appear cooked, place feta mixture in a line in the center of eggs. Using a spatula, fold eggs over top and bottom of cheese, then fold sides over.
Heat oil in a deep-fryer or large saucepan to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Fill a saucepan with 1/2-inch water; bring to a boil. Carefully place cold eggs into saucepan, cover the saucepan with a lid, reduce heat to medium-high, and cook until eggs yolks are soft, about 6 minutes. Remove from heat and pour cold water over eggs to halt the cooking process. Cool eggs to room temperature in cold water; peel and dry eggs on paper towels. Mix sausage, mustard, nutmeg, and cayenne pepper together in a bowl. Shape into 6 equal-size balls. Lay a piece of plastic wrap on a flat work surface. Place 1 ball of sausage mixture into the center of the plastic wrap, fold the plastic wrap over sausage, and flatten into an 1/8-inch thick oval shape. Pull plastic wrap back and place 1 egg in the center of the sausage. Pick up plastic wrap, moisten fingertips, and press sausage around egg to cover completely, sealing sausage around egg. Repeat with remaining eggs and sausage. Place bread crumbs in a shallow bowl. Pour flour into another shallow bowl. Beat remaining 2 eggs in another shallow bowl. Gently press eggs into flour to coat; shake off excess flour. Dip eggs into the beaten egg, then press into bread crumbs. Gently toss between your hands so any bread crumbs that haven't stuck can fall away. Place the breaded eggs onto a plate. Working in batches, cook eggs in the preheated oil until golden, 5 to 6 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack to cool, at least 5 minutes.
Preheat a lightly greased griddle over medium low heat. In a large bowl, mix quick cooking oats, flour, whole wheat flour, brown sugar, baking powder, dry milk powder, salt, cinnamon and cream of tartar. In a small bowl, beat together vegetable oil and eggs. Pour into the oats mixture, alternating with water, and mix thoroughly, creating a batter. Pour batter, 1/4 cup at a time, onto the prepared griddle. Cook on both sides until golden brown, flipping when the surface begins to bubble.
Prepare a basic crepe recipe in advance. Crepes can be made and frozen up to several weeks ahead of time. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Melt butter in a saucepan over medium heat. Stir in onion, and cook 2 minutes. Stir in flour until blended. Slowly whisk in 1 cup milk, whisking constantly until smooth. Mix in broth, wine, and tarragon; stir over medium-low heat until thickened (about 4 minutes). In a small bowl, gradually stir 3 tablespoons of the hot milk and broth sauce into the egg yolks; then pour egg mixture into sauce, whisking briskly. Cook 1 minute more, then remove from heat. In a medium bowl, mix together half of the sauce with the chicken. Season with salt to taste. Fill each crepe with 3 tablespoons of chicken mixture. Roll crepes, and place seam-side down in a 9x13 inch baking dish. Thin the remaining sauce with 1/4 cup milk, and pour over crepes. Bake in a preheated oven 20 minutes, or until sauce begins to bubble.
Place the banana, strawberries, blueberries, cherries, and ice cubes into a blender. Pour in the orange juice, vanilla yogurt, and honey. Puree until smooth.
Poke potatoes with a fork so that their skins are pierced. Microwave potatoes on high until cooked inside. When potatoes are fully cooked, peel potatoes and cut potatoes to 1/8 size or to your liking.  Set potatoes aside. Add 2 tablespoons oil to skillet and scramble 3 eggs.  Add salt and pepper to taste. Keep warm until potatoes are ready. In another skillet, heat 2 tablespoons oil until hot.  Then add salt, cumin, coriander and turmeric powder. Put in chili powder if you want it really spicy. Add potatoes and cook until potatoes are crispy and brown. Spicy potatoes and scrambled eggs are now ready to serve!
Slice the French bread on a slant, giving each side of the slice a nice surface area.  Slice the brick of cream cheese into 1/2 inch thick slices.  Make a slit in each slice of French bread through the crust to form a pocket. Place a slice of cream cheese in each pocket; set aside. In a small bowl, beat together eggs, Irish cream liqueur, cinnamon and nutmeg. Melt butter in a griddle or frying pan over medium-low heat. Briefly dip the bread slices in the egg mixture and place on the griddle. Brown on both sides and serve warm with a dollop of orange marmalade on top.
Grease and flour a 9 x 5 inch pan well.  Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a large mixing bowl, sift together sugar, flour, cinnamon, salt, and baking soda. In a smaller bowl, beat the eggs and oil.  Stir in pecans and strawberries.  Add egg mixture to the sifted ingredients, and stir until just combined. Bake for 1 hour, or until tester inserted in the center comes out clean.
Bring a large pot of lightly salted water to a boil. Add pasta and cook for 8 to 10 minutes or until al dente; drain. Meanwhile, preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease an 8x8 inch casserole dish. In a large bowl, mix together soup, milk, corned beef hash, onion, salt, pepper and noodles. Spoon into prepared casserole and sprinkle with cubed cheese. Bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes or until cheese is bubbly.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Cut bread slices in half diagonally, and arrange around edge of 9-inch pie plate. In a medium skillet, melt butter and saute zucchini until tender, about 3-5 minutes.  Add tomato and oregano, and cook for 3 minutes. Stir in the flour, and spoon mixture into center of the bread-lined pie plate. In a bowl, mix the cottage cheese, eggs, yogurt, and 1/2 the Parmesan cheese.  Spoon this mixture over the vegetables in the pie plate, and sprinkle with remaining Parmesan cheese. Bake 30 minutes in the preheated oven, until firm in center.
Generously grease a 9x13-inch casserole dish. Heat a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir sausage until crumbly and completely browned, about 10 minutes. Transfer cooked sausage to the prepared casserole dish. Cook and stir mushrooms in the same skillet over medium heat until liquid has been released and mushrooms are lightly browned, 5 to 10 minutes; drain. Mix mushrooms, eggs, bread, milk, Cheddar cheese, ham, spinach, flour, mustard powder, salt, butter, and basil together in a large bowl; pour over sausage. Cover casserole dish and refrigerate, 2 hours to overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center of the strata comes out clean, 60 to 70 minutes.
Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir red pepper and onion in hot oil until tender, about 5 minutes. Beat eggs and milk together in a bowl until smooth; add spinach, ham, mozzarella cheese, feta cheese, salt, and black pepper. Gently stir to mix evenly; pour into the skillet. Place a cover on the skillet and cook until the egg mixture is completely set in the center, 7 to 10 minutes. Cut into wedges to serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour 2 loaf pans. Sift flour, baking soda, cinnamon, and salt together in a large bowl; make a well in the center. Whisk eggs, butter, sugar, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Fold mango, coconut, and walnuts into the egg mixture; pour resulting mixture into the well in the center of the flour and mix well. Pour batter into prepared loaf pans and let sit at room temperature for 20 minutes. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 1 hour. Cool in the pans for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Build a campfire and allow the fire to burn until it has accumulated a bed of coals. Cook and stir the sausage, onion, and garlic in a 12-inch cast iron Dutch oven with lid, raised over the coals to medium-high heat, until the sausage is no longer pink and the onion is tender. Stir in the red bell pepper, green bell pepper, and hash brown potatoes until evenly mixed. Cook, stirring occasionally, until the hash browns are hot and the peppers are tender, about 15 minutes. Pour the beaten eggs evenly over the top of the potatoes, allowing them to sink into the potatoes. Cover the Dutch oven, and place 6 to 9 coals underneath, and 12 to 18 on top. Allow to bake until the eggs are firm, about 40 minutes. Sprinkle with Cheddar cheese, cover, and continue cooking until the cheese has melted, about 5 minutes.
Preheat an oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Prepare a baking sheet with cooking spray. Arrange the bacon on the prepared baking sheet, and sprinkle with 2 tablespoons brown sugar. Bake in the preheated oven until the bacon is crispy and the brown sugar is caramelized, 10 to 15 minutes. Immediately remove the bacon to a cutting board; cut into small pieces and set aside. Preheat a waffle iron; grease with cooking spray. Whisk the flour, 1/2 cup brown sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a large bowl. Beat the eggs, buttermilk, vegetable oil, and vanilla together in a separate bowl; fold the wet mixture into the flour mixture. Add the bacon and stir, being careful to not over mix. Ladle the batter into the preheated waffle iron and cook until golden brown; serve hot.
In a large skillet, fry bacon pieces on medium heat until brown and a little bit crispy. Set aside bacon. Cook and stir shredded potatoes in bacon drippings on medium heat until tender. In a large bowl, whisk eggs, and salt and pepper. Add eggs to potatoes. Reduce heat to low. Cover and simmer for 10 minutes. Sprinkle cheese and bacon pieces on top of potatoes. Let cheese melt. Serve.
Bring a small pot of salted water to a boil.  Add potato and cook until tender but still firm, about 15 minutes. Drain, cool and chop. Saute the onion and garlic in a lightly oiled skillet over medium high heat. When onion is soft, stir in the spinach and cook until wilted, about 2 minutes. Reduce heat to medium and pour in the eggs.  Cook until the bottom has set, about 2 minutes. Stir in the potatoes and tomatoes; sprinkle on the salt, pepper, cayenne and hot sauce. Cook, stirring occasionally, until eggs have set. Sprinkle with grated cheese and serve warm.
Preheat an oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Line pie pan with pie crust, and prick several places with a fork. Place a double layer of aluminum foil over the crust.  Bake in the preheated oven for 8 minutes, and then remove foil. Continue baking until crust begins to set, about 5 minutes; remove from oven. Reduce oven temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a large skillet, cook sausage until well browned, stirring frequently. Mix in shallots and garlic, and continue cooking for 1 minute. Stir in sun-dried tomatoes and 1 tablespoon parsley. Spread mixture into the bottom of the warm pie crust. In a mixing bowl, beat eggs with cream. Stir in cheese. Pour mixture over sausage in pie crust. Sprinkle remaining parsley over the top. Bake in preheated oven until crust browns and a knife inserted in the center comes out clean, about 45 to 60 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place the butter in a 9x13 inch baking dish and put the dish in the oven while it preheats. In the container of a blender, combine the eggs, flour and baking powder. Cover and blend until smooth, about 1 minute. Pour into a large bowl and fold in the cottage cheese and Monterey Jack cheese. Pour over the melted butter in the dish. Bake in the preheated oven until firm in the center, about 30 minutes. A knife inserted into the center should come out clean.
In a medium bowl, stir together the pancake mix, mustard, mayonnaise, egg and parsley until well blended. Fold in the crabmeat. Form into 3 inch patties. Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium to medium-high heat. There should be enough oil to reach half way up the sides of the crab cakes. When the oil is hot, carefully place the patties in the pan. Fry until golden brown on each side, about 8 minutes per side. If patties are browning too fast, reduce the heat. Drain on paper towels, and serve immediately.
In a large skillet, stir together the water, garlic, and paprika. Separate the bacon slices, and place in the skillet. Turn the heat to high. The water will evaporate leaving the bacon coated with the garlic and paprika. Reduce the heat to medium-high, and continue to fry to your desired crispness, turning as needed.
Combine the rice and water in a small saucepan. Bring to a boil, then cover, reduce heat to low, and simmer for 15 to 20 minutes, until tender. Melt one tablespoon of butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Add carrots and onion. Cook, stirring frequently until onions are tender and lightly browned, about 5 minutes. Add the cooked rice, and stir to blend well. Mix in the remaining butter. Reduce heat to medium-low, and stir in ketchup. Simmer for about 5 minutes to blend flavors, then remove from heat. In a small bowl, whisk together the eggs and milk. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Pour half of the egg mixture into the skillet. Cook until firm, turning over once halfway through. Remove from the skillet and cut in half. Repeat with the remaining eggs. For each serving, place a scoop of rice onto a plate, and form into a flattened log shape. Top with one of the egg halves. Ketchup, salt and pepper may be added on top of the eggs at the table.
Bring a pot of water to a boil. Add eggs, and cook for 3 minutes. The yolks need to be runny. While the eggs cook, crush the crackers into two coffee mugs with the butter. When the eggs are done, remove from the water, and peel. Place one soft-boiled egg into each cup. Mix into the crackers, and season with salt and pepper.
In a medium bowl, blend the cream cheese with brown sugar, allspice, nutmeg and cinnamon Spread 4 slices bread with the cream cheese mixture, and top with remaining bread slices, creating sandwiches. Mix eggs and milk in a shallow bowl. Dip bread into the egg and milk to coat thoroughly. Melt butter in a medium skillet over medium high heat. Cook coated bread slices 2 to 4 minutes on each side, or until golden brown.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x9 inch baking dish. In a medium bowl, mix flour, baking powder, butter and sugar. Stir in eggs and milk. In a separate medium bowl, mix cottage cheese, butter, egg, sour cream and salt. Place 1/2 the flour mixture in the baking dish. Cover with the cottage cheese mixture, and top with remaining flour mixture. Bake 50 minutes in the preheated oven, until puffed and golden brown. Allow to cool slightly, and cut into squares to serve.
Place the rolled oats, cinnamon, cranberries, and blueberries in a microwave safe bowl. Add the turmeric and ginger, if desired. Pour in the water, and stir to mix ingredients. Cook on High until water is absorbed, about 2 minutes. Stir in orange juice to desired consistency.
Place the orange juice, pineapple juice,  yogurt, blueberries, strawberries, and bananas into a blender. Cover and blend until smooth. The berry drink will be very thick. Serve immediately.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease and flour an 8 1/2 x 4 1/2 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, combine flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, cinnamon, nutmeg, brown sugar, and  oats.  Add apple, nuts, raisins, eggs, milk, and oil.  Mix until dry ingredients are moistened. Bake for 55 to 60 minutes, or until done.  Cool on wire rack.
Beat together the milk and the eggs. Stir in the salt and the sugar and mix well. Add the baking soda and citric acid. Blend in the flour. Add the vegetable oil and pour in the boiling water, stirring constantly. The batter should be very thin, almost watery. Set the bowl aside and let it rest for 20 minutes. Melt a tablespoon of butter in a small frying pan over medium-high heat. Pick the pan up off the heat. Pour in a ladleful of batter while you rotate your wrist, tilting the pan so the batter makes a circle and coats the bottom. The blini should be very thin. Return the pan to the heat. Cook the blini for 90 seconds. Carefully lift up an edge of the blini to see if it's fully cooked: the edges will be golden and it should have brown spots on the surface. Flip the blini over and cook the other side for 1 minute. Transfer the blini to a plate lined with a clean kitchen towel. Continue cooking the blini, adding an additional tablespoon of butter to the pan after each 4 blini. Stack them on top of each other and cover with the kitchen towel to keep warm. Spread your favorite filling in the center of the blini, and fold three times to make a triangle shape. You can also fold up all 4 sides, like a small burrito.
Fill a bowl with ice water. Fill a saucepan with cold water and place over medium heat; stir in vinegar and salt. Bring to a gentle, slow simmer and reduce heat to low. Break each egg into a separate small ramekin; place a ramekin close to the surface of the water and gently pour egg into the simmering water. Let egg white set for a minute or two and use a silicone spatula to gently lift egg from the bottom of the pan to prevent sticking. Cook until white is firm and yolk is runny, about 6 minutes. Lift poached egg from water using a slotted spoon and transfer gently to bowl of ice water to stop the cooking process. Reheat eggs for 1 1/2 to 2 minutes in very gently simmering water and remove with a slotted spoon. Tap bottom of slotted spoon containing egg on a dry paper towel to remove any excess water before serving.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Set butter in a 6x10-inch casserole dish; place dish in the preheating oven until butter is melted. Mix cottage cheese, Jack cheese, green chiles, eggs, flour, baking powder, and salt in a large bowl using an electric hand mixer. Pour mixture into the melted butter in the casserole dish. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes. Reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C); bake until middle of casserole is set, about 50 more minutes. Allow to stand for 10 minutes before serving.
Heat a skillet over medium heat. Crumble sausage into skillet; cook and stir until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Cool sausage. Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Line the baking dish with crescent roll dough. Sprinkle cooled sausage and Cheddar cheese over crescent roll dough. Cover the baking dish with plastic wrap and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Whisk eggs, milk, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl. Pour egg mixture over sausage and cheese in the baking dish. Cover the baking dish with aluminum foil. Bake in the preheated oven for 20 minutes. Remove and discard aluminum foil and reduce oven temperature to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Continue baking until egg mixture is set, 15 to 25 minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Stir water and flax seed meal together in a bowl. Blend oats in a blender into a flour-like consistency. Add flax seed mixture, soy milk, all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, canola oil, baking powder, vanilla extract, agave nectar, and salt to oats; blend until batter is just mixed. Ladle 1/2 cup batter into preheated waffle iron. Cook the waffles according to manufacturer's instructions until golden and crisp, about 5 minutes.
Blend banana, eggs, oats, and baking powder in a blender until smooth, about 45 seconds. Spray a griddle or skillet with cooking spray and heat over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Stir water, almond milk, applesauce, steel-cut oats, dried cherries, brown sugar, vanilla, and cinnamon together in a slow cooker. Cook on Low for 8 hours to overnight.
Heat a large skillet over medium heat; add butter. Mash banana chunks in a bowl using a fork until it becomes a wet consistency. Add egg and whisk mixture until batter is smooth. Drop batter into the hot butter to make 2 pancakes. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 3 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 2 minutes.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Grease a shallow 2-quart baking dish. Heat a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir salami, artichokes, tomatoes, and mushrooms until heated through, about 4 minutes. Transfer salami mixture to baking dish. Whisk eggs, milk, green onions, garlic, basil, onion powder, salt, and black pepper in a large bowl; pour eggs over salami mixture. Sprinkle with mozzarella cheese and Parmesan cheese. Bake until eggs are set and cheese is melted, about 20 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Brown breakfast sausage in a large skillet until no longer pink and the meat is crumbly, about 10 minutes. Drain excess grease and set sausage aside. Separate crescent roll dough into triangles and place into a 12-inch pizza pan with a rim, points toward the inside. Press the triangles together to join; pinch a 1 1/2-inch rim up the side of the pizza pan. Spoon cooked sausage into the bottom of the crust. Spread hash browns over the sausage and sprinkle with Cheddar cheese. Whisk eggs, milk, salt, and black pepper in a bowl until smooth and pour the egg mixture over the cheese layer. Sprinkle pizza evenly with Parmesan cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set and crust is lightly browned, 25 to 30 minutes.
Place ingredients in the bread machine pan in the order suggested by the manufacture Select the Basic or White Bread setting. There is no need to select Fruit Bread setting, nor to add the raisins in later. Start the machine. After first knead, bread should be smooth, elastic, and dry to touch. Adjust if necessary with additional flour. After baking, remove pan immediately. Rest for 10 minutes in the pan. Remove bread from the pan, and cool on a wire rack for 10 minutes before serving.
Assemble ingredients in the order suggested in your bread machine manual.  Select the Basic Bread cycle.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs, sour cream, Cheddar cheese, green chile peppers, green onion, and parsley. Mix in the corn, black beans, red pepper, and bacon bits. Transfer to the prepared baking dish. Bake 30 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a knife inserted in the center of the casserole comes out clean. Serve with the fresh salsa.
Place half of the bread cubes into a lightly greased 9x13 inch baking pan. Scatter cream cheese over bread; sprinkle with blueberries. Place remaining bread cubes over the blueberries. In a large bowl, beat together eggs, maple syrup and milk. Pour egg mixture over bread cubes. Cover pan with aluminum foil and refrigerate overnight. The next morning, preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake, covered, for 25 minutes. Uncover and bake an additional 15 to 20 minutes, or until puffed and golden brown. Serve warm.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease the bottom of a 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a bowl, combine the raisin nut bran cereal and milk; let stand for 5 minutes. In a large bowl, sift together flour, baking powder, baking soda and salt. In a separate bowl, beat together mashed banana, sugar, brown sugar, vegetable oil and egg. Combine the cereal and banana mixtures. Stir in the flour mixture just until combined. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in preheated oven for 50 to 55 minutes, until a toothpick inserted into center of loaf comes out clean. Let cool before slicing.
Fill a large tumbler with ice cubes. Pour in the vodka, then drop in the olives and the olive brine. Season with celery salt, pepper, Worcestershire sauce and hot pepper sauce. Fill the remainder of the glass with tomato and clam juice cocktail. Stir with the celery stalk and leave it in as a garnish. Sprinkle with a little bit of celery salt before serving.
Bring the milk and water to a boil in a pot. Mix in the oats, and reduce heat to medium. Stir in blueberries, applesauce, wheat germ, cinnamon, and sugar. Cook 8 to 10 minutes, or until oats are tender.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spread shrimp evenly across the bottom of the pie crust. Sprinkle cheese over the shrimp. Stir sour cream, green onions, salt and pepper into the beaten eggs; then pour mixture evenly over the shrimp and cheese. Bake in a preheated oven for 25 to 30 minutes. Serve warm or cold.
In a large glass bowl, stir together the oats, raisins, honey, yogurt and soy milk. Cover and refrigerate overnight before serving.
In a large bowl sift together the flour, baking powder, cocoa, ginger, cinnamon and cloves; stir in hazelnuts. Set aside. In a medium bowl whisk together milk, egg whites and molasses. Make a well in the dry ingredients and pour wet ingredients into it.  Stir just enough to moisten; batter will be lumpy. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
In a large bowl, beat together eggs and milk. Stir in onion, ham, cheese, salt, pepper and garlic powder. Melt butter in a large frying pan or skillet over medium high heat. Add eggs and cook, without stirring, until eggs begin to set. At that point, stir the eggs until roughly scrambled.  Keep doing this until eggs are fully cooked, about 10 to 15 minutes. Serve warm.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a medium bowl, stir together the flour and sugar. Add the oil, milk and eggs, mix until well blended. Stir in the cranberries, banana and apple, mix until fruit is evenly distributed. Pour into the prepared pan. Bake for 1 hour in the preheated oven, until a toothpick or knife inserted, comes out clean.
Bring chicken broth, milk, and 1 teaspoon garlic to a boil in a saucepan. Stir in grits, reduce heat to low, and simmer until thickened, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat and thoroughly mix in Cheddar cheese; season with salt and black pepper. Set grits aside and keep warm. Heat butter and olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir onion and 2 teaspoons garlic until softened and beginning to brown, about 5 minutes. Stir shrimp into onion mixture and cook until shrimp are pink and no longer translucent in the center, about 5 more minutes. Stir in hot pepper sauce. Serve grits in a large serving bowl topped with shrimp mixture.
Beat eggs together with milk, sugar and Vanilla extract in shallow bowl until well blended. Place panko in pie pan or shallow dish. Dip each bread slice into egg mixture, thoroughly coating both sides; then coat both sides of bread slices with bread crumbs. Place on large wire rack. Add butter and oil into 17-1/4 x 11-1/2-inch jellyroll pan. Place pan in 400 degrees F. oven 1 to 2 minutes, or until butter melts. Remove pan from oven. Place bread slices into pan, in single layer, turning over once to coat both sides of bread slices with butter mixture. Return to oven and bake 15 minutes. Turn bread slices over and bake 10 minutes longer, or until golden brown. Serve with butter and maple syrup.
Preheat an oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Coat the bottom of a 9x13 inch pan with cooking spray. Combine spinach and onion in the bowl of a food processor. Process to finely chop. Add eggs, milk, and baking mix; process to mix. Pour mixture into prepared pan. Sprinkle ham and cheese over the top. Bake in preheated oven  for 35 to 45 minutes. Quiche is done when toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean. Garnish with tomato slices to serve.
Pour warm water and honey into a large bowl, and stir to dissolve the honey. Sprinkle the yeast over the top of the liquid, and let stand until the yeast bubbles and forms a creamy layer, about 10 minutes. In a bowl, stir together the whole wheat flour, gluten, flax seeds, flax meal, rolled oats, sesame seeds, quinoa, sunflower seeds, and salt until the seeds are dispersed evenly. Pour the flour mixture into the yeast mixture, add the coconut oil, and mix everything together. Scoop the dough out onto a well-floured surface, and knead until smooth and springy, about 15 minutes. Allow dough to rest for 15 minutes, then knead for another 10 minutes. Form the dough into a ball, place in an oiled bowl, and turn the dough over several times to coat with oil. Cover and let rise in a warm place until doubled, 30 to 45 minutes. Grease 2 9x5-inch loaf pans. Punch down the dough, and cut into 2 pieces. Form each piece into a loaf, place into the loaf pans, seam sides down, and cover the pans with plastic wrap. Let rise until doubled, about 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake the loaves in the preheated oven until the loaves are golden brown and sound hollow when tapped, 30 to 35 minutes. Let cool in pans about 10 minutes before turning out to finish cooling on racks.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions; spray the inside with cooking spray. Whisk almond milk, applesauce, egg, chia seeds, and vanilla extract together in a bowl; let sit until chia seeds start to thicken the mixture, about 2 minutes. Whisk flour, oats, flax seed meal, baking powder, sugar, and salt into almond milk mixture until batter is smooth. Scoop 1/2 cup batter into the preheated waffle iron and cook until crisp and golden, about 5 minutes per waffle. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place bacon in a 10-inch skillet and cook over medium heat, turning occasionally, until crisp, about 10 minutes. Use a slotted spoon to remove bacon to a paper towel-lined small bowl. Discard half the bacon fat using a spoon. Cook sausage in the hot skillet until browned on both sides, about 5 minutes. Remove to the bowl with the bacon. Heat canola oil and butter in the same skillet over medium heat. Add hash browns and onion. Sprinkle 1/2 teaspoon garlic powder, onion powder, 1/4 teaspoon salt, and 1/4 teaspoon black pepper on top and stir together. Spread out the hash browns; cook, without stirring, until browned, about 5 minutes. Turn hash browns over and sprinkle Cheddar cheese evenly over the top. Stir remaining garlic powder, eggs, and milk together in a bowl; season with salt and pepper. Pour egg mixture over the Cheddar cheese-covered hash browns in the skillet. Sprinkle bacon and sausage pieces on top. Bake in the preheated oven until top is puffed, cheese is melted, and a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, 10 to 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Whisk milk, eggs, vanilla extract, sugar, nutmeg, and salt together in a bowl. Heat 1 1/2 teaspoons butter in a skillet over medium heat. Working in batches, dip each slice of brioche bread in the egg mixture and cook in the hot butter until golden, 2 to 3 minutes per side, adding more butter as needed. Transfer French toast to a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until puffed, 8 to 10 minutes. Cook and stir 1/4 cup butter in a skillet over medium-low heat until browned and toasty, 3 to 5 minutes. Transfer browned butter to a cold dish. Drizzle browned butter over baked French toast and top each slice with 1 tablespoon maple syrup.
Spray the inside of a slow cooker with cooking spray. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels and crumble. Spray a skillet with cooking spray and place over medium heat; cook and stir onion, red bell pepper, and garlic until onion is softened, about 5 minutes. Stir potatoes into onion mixture. Spoon 1/3 the potato mixture into the slow cooker; add 1/3 the bacon and 1/3 the Cheddar cheese. Repeat layering with remaining ingredients, ending with cheese. Whisk eggs, milk, dill, salt, and pepper together in a bowl; pour over ingredients in slow cooker. Cook on Low, 8 to 10 hours.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In an ovenproof skillet over medium heat, heat 1 tablespoon of olive oil until it shimmers, and place the potatoes into the hot oil. Season with salt and pepper, and sprinkle with smoked paprika. Pan fry the potatoes, stirring and tossing occasionally, until they are beginning to soften, about 8 minutes. Stir in the onion, and cook, stirring occasionally, until the potatoes and onion are slightly browned and the onion is translucent, about 10 more minutes. Take the skillet off the heat, and allow to cool for about 5 minutes. Beat the eggs with 1 teaspoon of olive oil in a large bowl. Stir in the parsley, add the potato-onion mixture, and lightly combine. Heat 1 tablespoon of olive oil in the skillet over medium heat until it shimmers, then gently spoon the egg-potato mixture into the hot skillet. Reduce heat to medium-low, and shake the skillet a few times to help release the omelet from the bottom of the skillet. Slide the skillet into the preheated oven, and bake until the omelet is puffed and the top is golden brown, about 5 minutes. A toothpick inserted into the center of the omelet should come out clean. Cut the omelet into pie-shaped pieces, and serve hot.
Stir together oats, almond milk, and salt in a large microwave-safe bowl. Microwave on High for 5 to 6 minutes, stirring every 2 minutes, until oats are soft and most of the liquid has been absorbed. Stir in cherries. Spoon into bowls and serve while hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease 2 9x5-inch loaf pans. In a bowl, whisk together the flour, baking soda, and salt. In a separate large bowl, beat the butter, vegetable shortening, white sugar, and brown sugar together with an electric mixer on Low until thoroughly mixed; beat in the bananas, eggs, buttermilk, sour cream, and vanilla extract until well combined. Mix half of the flour mixture into the banana mixture; beat until combined; beat in remaining flour mixture. Mix on Medium speed for 1 minute. Pour the batter into the prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center of the loaves comes out clean, 50 minutes to 1 hour. Allow to cool for 15 minutes; serve warm.
Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir chicken tenderloins in hot oil until the juices run clear and meat is no longer pink inside, about 10 minutes, turning once. Chop chicken. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray 16 muffin cups with cooking spray. Split each biscuit in half and press dough halves into prepared muffin cups, shaping the dough into the bottom and up the sides of each muffin cup. Mix chicken and with cream of chicken soup, mixed vegetables, and half the Cheddar cheese in a bowl. Spoon a heaping tablespoon of chicken, vegetables, and sauce into each dough cup and top each with 1 1/2 teaspoon of remaining Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until biscuit cups are slightly browned and puffed, the cheese is melted, and the filling is hot, about 14 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease one 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, cream together the butter, sugar, and 1 egg. Beat in second egg until smooth. Mix in pumpkin, orange rind and juice. In another bowl, measure and stir together the flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, cinnamon, cloves, nuts, and dates. Pour all at once into batter in mixing bowl. Stir only to moisten. Pour into the prepared loaf pan. Bake for about 1 hour in the preheated oven, or until an toothpick inserted comes out clean. Cool in pan 10 minutes. Remove loaf from pan to rack. Cool and wrap.
In skillet or frying pan, warm oil over medium heat. Add tomatoes to skillet and cook until juices begin to evaporate, about 3 to 5 minutes. Break eggs into skillet and cook to desired firmness without breaking yolks. Season to taste with salt and pepper.
In a large bowl, stir together the flour, sugar and custard powder. Mix in the soy milk with a whisk so there are no lumps. Heat a griddle over medium heat, and coat with nonstick cooking spray. Spoon batter onto the surface, and cook until bubbles begin to form on the surface. Flip with a spatula and cook on the other side until golden.
In a medium bowl, mix together the oats, oat bran, raisins, apricots, and cinnamon. Stir in yogurt, cover, and refrigerate overnight. In the morning, pour the milk over the muesli, and sprinkle with walnuts. You may wish to add more milk depending on your preference.
Toss chopped pears with sugar, ginger, and cloves in a large bowl. Set aside and let the sugar dissolve in the pear juices. Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease an 8x4-inch loaf pan. Stir vegetable oil, vanilla extract, and eggs into the pears. In a separate bowl, combine flour, baking soda, baking powder, and salt. Add the flour mixture to the pear mixture and stir gently just to combine. Pour the batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown and a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, about 40 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 F. In a large mixing bowl, combine eggs, milk or water, cheese, salt and pepper; set aside. Heat olive oil or butter in a large skillet; saute onions and any optional vegetables desired until vegetables are tender. Add vegetables and sausage to egg mixture; stir well. Place 12 foil baking cups into cupcake pan. Distribute sausage and egg mixture evenly into baking cups. Bake for 22 minutes or until eggs are set. Remove from oven. Sprinkle with Parmesan if desired.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease and flour a 9x13 inch baking pan. In a large bowl, stir together the oats, brown sugar, salt and baking powder. In a separate medium bowl, stir together the eggs, milk, vanilla and canola oil. Pour the wet ingredients into the dry ingredients, and stir until well blended. Spoon into the prepared baking pan, and spread evenly. Sprinkle walnuts over the top. Bake for 30 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean.
Pierce the sweet potato a few times with a fork. Wrap in a paper towel and cook in the microwave for 5 minutes at full power, or until tender. Cool slightly, and remove the skin with a small knife. Meanwhile, process the oats in a blender or food processor until powdery. Transfer the oats to a large bowl. Break the sweet potato into chunks, and place in the food processor. Blend until smooth. Transfer to the bowl with the oats, and stir in the olive oil, molasses, eggs, egg white, vanilla, cinnamon and yogurt. Adjust the thickness to your liking by adding more yogurt if necessary. Heat a lightly greased skillet over medium heat. Pour 1/4 cupfuls of batter onto the skillet when hot, and cook until bubbles appear on the surface. Flip, and cook on the other side until browned. Continue with remaining batter.
In a cereal bowl, stir together the ricotta cheese, sweetener and vanilla. Cover with plastic wrap, and poke a hole to vent steam. Heat in the microwave oven for 2 to 3 minutes, until hot. Remove plastic wrap, stir and enjoy.
Place bacon in a skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Keeping drippings in the skillet, remove the bacon and drain on paper towels. Crumble the bacon. While the bacon is cooking, mix the eggs, milk, water, salt, and pepper in a bowl until combined. Add potatoes to the bacon drippings and cook until semi-soft. Stir in the onions. Cook and stir for 1 minute. Pour the egg mixture into the skillet. Stir in the crumbled bacon and the butter. Cook until the eggs set to your desired firmness. Spoon mixture into tortillas and serve.
Split the muffins open with a fork and toast them in a toaster oven. In a large bowl scramble the eggs, green onions and cheddar cheese together. Heat vegetable oil in a skillet, pour the egg mixture into the skillet and let it fry in one layer as you would an omelet. When the egg is cooked on the underside, flip the egg over and cook the wet side; remove from heat when cooked through. At the same time that the eggs are frying, form the sausage into small patties.  Place the sausage in another skillet. Fry until browned, remove from pan and drain on paper towels. Make the muffin sandwiches by layering a piece of sausage and a piece of the fried egg between the two muffin pieces. If you intend to freeze the sandwiches, let each part of the sandwich cool before make the sandwiches, then wrap them in plastic wrap and freeze. Reheat in the microwave.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease and flour an 8 1/2 x 4 1/2 inch loaf pan. Soak raisins in apple juice. In a large bowl, whisk together flour, baking powder, soda, cinnamon, oats, and brown sugar.  Add applesauce, oil, eggs, and milk; stir until just combined.  Mix in raisins.  Spread batter into prepared pan. Bake for 55 to 60 minutes.   Remove from pan immediately, and cool on a wire rack.
Stir together flour, baking powder, sugar, salt, nutmeg, and 1/4 cup pecans. Mix sweet potato puree, egg yolks, and milk in a large bowl until well combined.  Add flour mixture, and mix well. Beat egg whites until stiff peaks form.  Fold 1/4 of the egg whites into batter.  Lightly fold remaining whites and melted butter into the batter. Cook in a hot waffle iron. Garnish with more chopped pecans.
In a large bowl, beat together the margarine, milk, eggs and sugar. Stir in the flour, baking powder, baking soda and salt. Carefully fold in the blueberries and walnuts. Fold in lemon zest. Spray bread machine pan with cooking spray. Pour mixture into bread machine pan and put pan into bread machine. Select Quick Bread/Cake cycle, and press Start. Check in 1 minute to see if mixture is well blended. Cook until cake cycle stops. Cool completely in bread machine pan before removing.
Butter a 9x13-inch baking dish. Cut and fit 8 slices of bread to fit over entire bottom of dish. Cover bread with slices of Canadian bacon and sharp Cheddar cheese. Cut and fit remaining 8 slices of bread to completely cover bacon and cheese. Whisk eggs with salt and black pepper in a bowl. Whisk dry mustard, onion, diced green and red bell pepper, Worcestershire sauce, and hot sauce into eggs. Whisk in milk until egg mixture is smoothly combined. Pour egg mixture evenly over the casserole. Cover the dish and refrigerate overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Pour melted butter evenly over the casserole and sprinkle corn flake crumbs over the top. Bake in the preheated oven until set and lightly browned, about 1 hour. Let casserole stand for 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil. Place pie crust into a 9-inch deep pie dish and prick crust all over with a fork; brush with oil. Place crust onto prepared baking sheet. Bake crust in the preheated oven for 8 minutes. Place broccoli into a bowl and microwave on high until broccoli is bright green and slightly tender, about 4 minutes. Whisk eggs, milk, Dijon mustard, oregano, salt, pepper, and thyme in a bowl; stir broccoli into egg mixture. Pour mixture into crust and sprinkle quiche with Cheddar and Parmesan cheeses. Place pie dish on the baking sheet. Bake until a knife inserted into the middle of the quiche comes out clean, about 40 minutes. Let stand 10 minutes before cutting.
Toast the almonds in a skillet over medium heat until just golden, 3 to 5 minutes; set aside. Heat the cinnamon and quinoa together in a saucepan over medium heat until warmed through. Add the milk and sea salt to the saucepan and stir; bring the mixture to a boil, reduce heat to low, place a cover on the saucepan, and allow to cook at a simmer for 15 minutes. Stir the vanilla, honey, dates, apricots, and about half the almonds into the quinoa mixture. Top with the remaining almonds to serve.
Combine the oats, milk, flax seeds, walnuts, honey, and banana in a microwave-safe bowl. Cook in microwave on High for 2 minutes. Mash the banana with a fork and stir into the mixture. Serve hot.
Beat together the eggs, molasses, cream, vanilla, ginger, and cinnamon in a bowl until smooth. Dip the challah slices in the batter until coated on all sides. Melt half of the butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Place half of the challah slices into the pan, and cook until golden brown on each side, about 3 minutes per side. Repeat with remaining butter and challah slices.
Heat the vegetable oil in a deep skillet over medium heat. Stir in the garlic, onion, and bell pepper; cook and stir until the onion has softened and turned translucent, about 5 minutes.  Add the canned tomatoes, paprika and jalapenos; stir, using the back of a spoon to break up the tomatoes.  Simmer for about 25 minutes. Crack an egg into a small bowl, then gently slip the egg into the tomato sauce. Repeat with the remaining eggs. Cook the eggs until the whites are firm and the yolks have thickened but are not hard, 2 1/2 to 3 minutes. If the tomato sauce gets dry, add a few tablespoons of water. Remove the eggs with a slotted spoon, place onto a warm plate, and serve with the tomato sauce and pita bread.
Combine oats, flour, baking soda, sugar, and salt in a large bowl. Set bowl aside. In a separate bowl, whisk together the skim milk, eggs, peanut butter, and melted butter. Make a well in the center of the dry ingredients and stir in the wet ingredients, being careful not to over mix the batter. Heat a large skillet over medium heat, and coat with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 cupfuls of batter onto the skillet, and cook until bubbles appear on the surface. Flip with a spatula, and cook until browned on the other side, about 2 minutes per side. Serve with strawberry jam.
Mix 1 cup of flour with sugar, salt, and yeast in a bowl, stir well. Place milk and anise extract into a small saucepan over low heat, and warm to about 110 degrees F (43 degrees C). Make a well in the center of the flour mixture with your hand, and pour in the milk mixture; swirl with your hand in a circular motion to combine the flour mixture with the milk mixture. Mix in butter and eggs, one at a time, then mix in remaining flour until dough begins to pull together. Turn the dough out onto a floured work surface, and knead until soft but elastic, about 8 minutes. Cover with a damp cloth, and let dough rest for 10 minutes; cut dough into halves. On floured work surface, roll each half into a ball, then shape the balls into 2 long pieces, about 1 1/2 inches thick and 18 to 20 inches long. Pinch the 2 top ends together, and loosely twist the pieces to form a twisted loaf; pinch the bottom ends together, and tuck the two ends underneath the loaf. (Alternately, form the twist into a ring, and pinch the ends together.) Grease a baking sheet, lay the loaf onto the prepared sheet, and cover with a damp towel; let rise until doubled, about 1 hour. Brush loaf with beaten egg, and sprinkle with colored decorating dragees. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake the decorated loaf in the preheated oven until golden, 20 to 25 minutes. Watch closely towards the end of the baking time that the bread does not begin to burn. Transfer to wire rack immediately after baking to cool.
Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Whisk eggs, half-and-half, 1 tablespoon brown sugar, and vanilla extract in a bowl until mixture is smooth and brown sugar has dissolved. Pour 1 cup egg mixture into prepared baking dish. Arrange slices of French bread into baking dish and pour remaining egg mixture evenly over bread. Cover and refrigerate overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Melt butter in a saucepan over medium heat; mix 3/4 cup brown sugar and maple syrup into butter, stirring until smooth. Bring syrup to a boil, reduce heat to low, and simmer for 1 minute, stirring constantly. Stir pecans into syrup. Spoon pecan praline syrup evenly over French toast casserole. Bake casserole in the preheated oven until set and golden brown, about 30 minutes.
In a medium bowl, mix together flour, salt, and baking powder. Stir in mashed potatoes and onion until thoroughly combined. In a separate bowl, whisk together eggs and milk, and stir lightly into potato mixture. Stir in corn syrup and nutmeg, mixing well. Heat a large griddle to medium-high heat. Coat with shortening and spoon potato mixture onto griddle in 12 equal portions. Fry until brown on both sides. Serve hot.
In a large bowl, stir together the all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, wheat germ, and baking powder. Make a well in the center, and stir in the egg yolks, applesauce and milk until fairly smooth. If the batter seems too thick, stir in more milk. In a separate bowl, whip the egg whites with an electric mixer to soft peaks. Fold egg whites into the batter, just until blended. Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Scoop large spoonfuls of batter onto the hot pan, and fry until bubbles appear on the surface. Flip and cook until browned on the other side. Continue with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Heat olive oil in a cast iron pan, and cook onion and rosemary in oil until onion is soft. Toss bread cubes with olive oil and onions. Exact measurement of bread is not necessary. Place in a well oiled, deep sided, 9 inch square pan.  Toss with 1/2 cheese, and sprinkle remaining cheese over the top. Beat together milk, cream, and eggs. Pour over bread in pan. It is fine that the bread sticks out of the custard. Bake for 1 hour, or until browned and a knife inserted in the middle comes out clean (except for melted cheese).
In a medium bowl, mix the butter, molasses and egg substitute with an electric mixer until smooth. In a separate bowl, stir together the Kamut flour, whole wheat flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, ginger, cinnamon and cloves. Stir the dry ingredients into the molasses mixture alternating with the water, beginning and ending with the flour, stir just until blended. Preheat the waffle iron, and coat with cooking spray. Spoon the desired amount  of batter onto the hot iron, and cook until steam stops coming out, and waffles don't stick to the iron. Continue with remaining batter.
Create a pocket about 2/3 of the way into each slice of bread by cutting along an edge. Fill pockets with 2 or 3 banana slices each. In a medium bowl, beat together eggs, water, milk, vanilla extract, orange liqueur and orange zest. Dip the bread slices in the mixture, allowing slices to become saturated. Melt butter in a medium skillet over medium heat. Place a few slices at a time in the skillet, and cook, turning once, until both sides are golden brown. Dust with confectioners' sugar to serve.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Place squash, cut-side down, onto prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until flesh is tender, 30 to 45 minutes. Cool until easily handled. Scrape spaghetti squash flesh into a large bowl using a fork. Whisk eggs, evaporated milk, garlic powder, salt, and oregano together in a separate bowl; pour over squash. Mix chicken, 1/2 of the Parmesan cheese, 1/2 of the green onions, bacon bits, and black pepper into squash mixture; pour into a 9x13-inch casserole dish. Top mixture with remaining Parmesan cheese and green onions. Bake in the oven until cooked through and set, about 45 minutes.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Cover an 11x17-inch baking pan with aluminum foil; grease with cooking spray. Stir buttermilk pancake mix and water together in a bowl. Let batter stand, about 10 minutes. Pour batter into the prepared pan, spreading to the corners. Scatter chocolate chips, bananas, strawberries, and blueberries on top. Bake in the preheated oven until pale and set, about 12 minutes. Remove from oven. Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Broil pancake until browned, 1 to 2 minutes. Cool for 2 minutes. Slice with a pizza cutter or cookie cutters.
Preheat a lightly greased waffle iron. In a medium bowl, sift together flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda and salt. In a separate medium bowl, mix egg yolk, sour cream, coconut milk, pineapple and butter. Thoroughly mix in the flour mixture. Gently fold in egg whites. Pour the mixture into the prepared waffle iron, and cook until golden brown.
In a blender, combine pineapple juice, bananas, honey and ice. Blend until smooth. Pour into glasses and serve.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5 inch loaf pan. I use a glass one. In a medium bowl, cream together the butter and sugar until smooth. Beat in the eggs one at a time, then stir in the sour cream. Sift together the flour, baking soda, cream of tartar and salt; stir into the sour cream mixture until just blended. Fold in raisins. Transfer the batter to the prepared loaf pan. Bake for 50 to 60 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a small knife inserted into the crown, comes out clean.
Preheat the oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). In a large bowl, stir together the oats, wheat germ, walnuts, almonds, and dried cranberries. In a separate bowl, mix together the oil, honey, vanilla and cinnamon. Drizzle over the dry ingredients, and stir to coat evenly. Spread the mixture out in a thin layer on an ungreased cookie sheet. Bake for 30 to 40 minutes in the preheated oven, stirring every 10 minutes to toast evenly. Allow to cool completely before storing in an airtight container. Granola will become crunchier as it cools.
Place the grapefruit juice, strawberries, bananas, yogurt, honey, and ice into a blender. Cover, and blend until smooth.
Generously grease a 9 x 5 inch loaf pan.  Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a large bowl, combine melted butter or margarine and sugar.  Add eggs, and mix until light and fluffy.  Add milk, baking powder, lemon rind, and chopped nuts.  Mix well.  Sift flour, and gradually add to mixture; mix to just combine. Bake for 50 to 60 minutes, or until tester inserted in the center comes out clean. While bread is baking, combine lemon juice and confectioners' sugar in small dish.  Stir well before using.  Immediately upon removing bread from oven,  place pan on a cooling rack.  Using a large fork, poke holes all over the bread.  Pour lemon juice mixture over the top of the bread.  Cool for 15 minutes, and then remove from pan.
In a blender combine pineapple juice, bananas yogurt, strawberries, wheat germ and vanilla extract. Blend until smooth.
Heat oil in a large skillet or frying pan over medium-high heat. Spread potato slices across bottom of the pan and cook, turning once, until golden on both sides. Remove slices from pan and drain. When all potato slices have been cooked, return them to the pan. Turn heat to high. Pour on the beaten eggs and season with salt and pepper. Tilt the pan so that the eggs flow to the bottom of the pan. Turn heat to medium low. Cover pan with a plate and flip pan so that frittata is turned out onto plate. Slide the frittata back into the pan with the uncooked side down. Cover and let cook another 2 minutes. When frittata is finished cooking, remove it from the pan and drain briefly on paper towels before serving.
Preheat griddle to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Mix whole wheat flour, almond meal, oats, baking powder, and salt in a bowl. Beat an egg in a separate bowl. Beat milk, banana, and canola oil into the beaten egg; pour into flour mixture and stir until just combined into a lumpy batter. Pour batter 1/2-cupful at a time onto the hot griddle; cook until edges become crisp and bubbles have formed on the top, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip the pancakes and continue cooking until the bottom of the pancakes are browned, 3 to 5 minutes more.
Stir butter, dill, lemon zest, cayenne pepper, salt, and black pepper in a bowl until combined. Set aside. Fill a large saucepan with 2 to 3 inches of water and bring to a boil over high heat. Reduce heat to medium-low, pour in vinegar and a pinch of salt. Crack an egg into a bowl then gently slip the egg into the water. Repeat with remaining eggs. Poach eggs until whites are firm and yolks have thickened but are not hard, 4 to 6 minutes. Remove eggs from water with a slotted spoon, dab on a kitchen towel to remove excess water, then transfer to a warm plate. Generously spread each English muffin half with dill butter. Top with a layer of smoked salmon, then 1 poached egg. Season with cayenne pepper, salt, and black pepper to taste. Garnish with a dill sprig and serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spread zucchini on the bottom of the pie shell. Pour eggs over zucchini and top with Cheddar cheese. Bake in preheated oven until eggs are set, about 30 minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to the manufacturer's instructions. Whisk flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl; make a well in the center of the flour mixture. Beat milk, coconut oil, egg, and vanilla extract together in another bowl; pour into well in the flour mixture and stir until batter is just combined. Ladle batter into preheated waffle iron and cook until golden and crisp, 2 to 5 minutes.
Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat, swirling oil to coat the skillet. Pour eggs into hot skillet; eggs will bubble and firm immediately. Lift cooked edges of the omelet with a rubber spatula and tilt the skillet so that the uncooked egg runs underneath the lifted edge. Continue cooking, lifting edges and tilting the skillet, until omelet is almost completely set, 1 to 2 minutes total cooking time; remove from heat. Spread out any runny egg evenly on the top of the omelet with a rubber spatula. Sprinkle goat cheese, 1 1/2 teaspoons chives, sea salt, and black pepper over omelet. Gently lift one edge and fold 1/3 of the omelet into the center over the cheese and chives. Fold the opposite 1/3 of the omelet into the center. Slide omelet to the edge of the skillet and flip, folded side down, onto a plate. Top with remaining chives.
Place potatoes and onion into a large bowl and pour enough cold water in the bowl to cover by several inches. Let rest until potatoes and onion are completely soaked, 20 to 30 minutes. Pour potato mixture into a colander, rinse, drain, and squeeze repeatedly to remove all moisture. Whisk eggs, flour, salt, black pepper, and cayenne pepper together in a bowl until smooth. Mix potato mixture and egg mixture together in a large bowl with a spatula. Heat 1/4-inch oil in a heavy skillet over medium-high heat. When oil shimmers, drop large spoonfuls of potato batter into hot oil and flatten with a spatula to about 1/2-inch thick. Cook until the edges of pancakes are golden brown and crispy, 3 to 5 minutes. Reduce heat to medium, flip pancakes, and cook until golden brown and crispy on the other side, about 5 minutes more. Repeat cooking process with remaining batter.
Mash banana in a bowl using a fork; add eggs, baking powder, and cinnamon and mix batter well. Heat butter in a skillet over medium heat. Spoon batter into the hot butter and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend strawberries, raspberries, milk, yogurt, honey, and vanilla extract in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour two 9x5-inch loaf pans. Beat vegetable oil and sugar together in a bowl until creamy and smooth; stir in eggs. Mash bananas and lemon juice together in a separate bowl; mix into oil mixture until just incorporated. Sift flour, baking powder, and salt together in a third bowl; slowly mix into wet mixture using an electric mixer on low until just incorporated. Fold in walnuts. Pour batter into the two prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted in the center of the loaf comes out clean, about 1 hour 15 minutes.
Whisk together the eggs, milk, and pina colada mix in a bowl. Heat a skillet over medium heat; melt butter in the skillet until the foam disappears. Soak the bread slices in the egg mixture, turning the slices over a couple of times. Gently lay the soaked bread slices into the hot skillet 2 at a time and pan-fry until the french toast is golden brown, about 2 minutes per side. Transfer cooked french toast slices to a warmed platter while you finish cooking. Top each 2-slice serving with several slices of banana to serve.
Bring water to a boil in a saucepan; stir grits and salt into the boiling water, cover, and reduce heat to low. Simmer grits until tender, 15 to 20 minutes. Remove from heat and keep warm. Melt 1/4 cup butter in a pan over medium heat; cook and stir garlic until softened, about 2 minutes. Stir in green onions, cooking until green onions are wilted, another 4 minutes. Mix shrimp into the garlic and green onions and cook until shrimp are firm and pink, about 5 minutes. Stir in lemon juice, cayenne pepper, salt, and black pepper. Just before serving, mix 1/4 cup butter into the cooked grits, followed by processed cheese. Mix thoroughly until creamy and cheese is melted. Season with salt and black pepper. Place grits in a bowl, top with the shrimp, and pour pan sauce over shrimp and grits to serve.
Pour the drained can of black beans into a small saucepan and cook over medium-low until heated through. While the beans are heating, heat the vegetable oil in a large skillet. In a large bowl, scramble the eggs together. Pour the eggs into the hot skillet and scramble until cooked to desired wetness. Heat the tortillas in a microwave or in the oven until soft. Lay the tortillas flat and spoon as many black beans onto each tortilla as you like. Follow with eggs, cheese and salsa. Roll the tortillas into burritos. Serve or let cool and freeze for reheating and eating another morning.
In a bowl, beat eggs and milk together. Soak tortilla pieces in egg mixture for 5 to 10 minutes. Meanwhile, heat butter in a skillet over medium heat. Saute green onion and ham until onion is soft, about 5 minutes. Pour egg mixture into skillet and cook over medium/low heat until eggs are set.
Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain and set aside. Place 8 slices of toast on a baking sheet. Place a slice of pineapple, two slices of bacon and a slice of cheese  on each. Broil until cheese is melted. Serve hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place a large skillet over medium-high heat. Brown the ground beef, stirring constantly to break it up into fine pieces. When the beef is no longer pink, add the onion, and continue cooking until the onion has softened, and the beef has browned, about 5 more minutes. Drain excess grease from the beef, then season with pepper flakes, parsley, oregano, and garlic powder. Stir in beef broth, mushroom soup, corn, and rice. Cook for a few minutes to warm, then pour into a casserole dish. Bake in preheated oven for 25 minutes, then sprinkle with Cheddar cheese, and continue baking for 5 minutes or until cheese melts.
Heat milk in a saucepan set over medium-low heat. Whisk briskly with a wire whisk to create foam. Brew espresso and pour into 4 cups. Pour in milk, holding back the foam with a spoon. Spoon foam over the top.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Place potatoes in a saucepan with enough water to cover. Bring to a boil, and cook over medium heat until tender, about 10 minutes. Drain. While the potatoes are cooking, brown the sausage ring in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Once the skin is browned, cut into 2 inch pieces. Transfer the potatoes and sausage to a 9x13 inch baking dish. Drizzle the olive oil over them, and season with salt, pepper, garlic powder, onion powder and paprika. Bake for 15 minutes in the preheated oven. While the sausage and potatoes are baking, reheat the same skillet with the sausage juices over medium heat. Pour in beaten eggs, and cook, stirring occasionally, until eggs are scrambled and cooked through. Stir into the sausage and potatoes before serving.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Press the pie crust into the bottom and up the sides of a pie plate. Cook the sausage in a skillet over medium heat. Add onion and garlic, and cook stirring occasionally until sausage is browned, and onions are translucent. Drain and set aside. In a small bowl, mix together the mustard, 1 egg and light cream until well blended. Stir into the sausage mixture. Sprinkle 1 cup of the mozzarella cheese over the bottom of the pie crust. Place the sausage mixture over the cheese. Arrange tomato slices over the sausage layer, then top with the remaining cheese. Sprinkle dried basil and oregano over the cheese. Bake for 35 to 40 minutes in the preheated oven, until heated through and bubbly. Let stand for 20 minutes before slicing. Serve with Basil Mayonnaise. To make Basil Mayonnaise, combine the fresh basil, 1 egg, and lemon juice in a blender or food processor. Blend to mix, then gradually drizzle in oil while blending. Season with salt and pepper to taste.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Beat eggs and milk together in a large bowl. Stir sausage, Cheddar cheese, spinach, and oregano into egg mixture; pour into prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center of the casserole comes out clean, 30 to 40 minutes.
Place chorizo sausage in a skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir until sausage is browned and cooked through, about 5 minutes. Stir eggs into the sausage; cook and stir until eggs are set and scrambled with the chorizo, 3 to 5 minutes. Warm corn tortillas on an electric skillet until they are heated through, about 2 minutes. Place egg and chorizo into corn tortillas.
Combine egg, heavy cream or milk, salt, cayenne pepper, nutmeg, and lemon zest in a bowl. Mix until batter is thin and runny. (Add 2 tablespoons more milk or cream if needed.) Toast bread until lightly browned. Add Havarti cheese to each slice. Divide ham between two sandwiches. Bring the two halves of the sandwich together and place into the batter. Flip several times to coat evenly; place on a plate. Repeat with second sandwich. Fill a large saucepan with 2 inches of water and bring to a boil. In the meantime, melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Cook sandwiches in the hot butter until outside is browned and cheese is melted, about 4 minutes per side. Meanwhile, reduce saucepan heat to medium-low, pour in vinegar, and keep the water at a gentle simmer. Crack an egg into a small bowl, then gently slip it into the simmering water, holding the bowl just above the surface of water. Repeat with second egg. Cook until the egg white is firm and the yolk has thickened but is not hard, 2 1/2 to 3 minutes. Transfer sandwiches to plates and dust with cayenne pepper. Remove the eggs from the water with a slotted spoon, dab on a kitchen towel to remove excess water, and place onto each sandwich. Dust with cayenne pepper.
Place bacon in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Remove bacon from the pan, and reserve the grease. In a medium bowl, stir together the flour and baking powder. Stir in potatoes to make a sticky dough. Bring a large pot of water to a boil, and add 2 teaspoons of salt. Squeeze the potato mixture into 6 or 7 dumplings, or your desired size. Drop carefully into the boiling water. Simmer for 45 to 60 minutes. Remove to a platter with a slotted spoon. Serve with bacon grease brushed over the top, and crumbled bacon. These may also be sliced and fried the next day for another great meal.
Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add the potatoes, and cook for about 10 minutes, stirring occasionally, until you think they are about halfway done. Mix in the onion, mushrooms, red pepper, and green pepper. Continue to cook and stir until potatoes are golden brown and somewhat crisp, about 15 more minutes. Season with salt and pepper, and serve.
Place all ingredients in a blender. Blend on puree (or the highest setting) until smooth, about 30 seconds. Pour into glasses and serve.
Pour milk and eggnog into a steaming pitcher and heat to between 145 degrees F to 165 degrees F (65 to 70 degrees C) using the steaming wand. Brew the shot of espresso, then add to mug. Pour the steamed milk and eggnog into the mug, using a spoon to hold back the foam. Spoon foam over the top. Sprinkle nutmeg on top of the foam.
Bring a large pot of water to a boil.  Add the chicken and simmer until cooked through, approximately 10 minutes.  Drain, cool and cut into cubes. While boiling chicken, make the mayonnaise:  Using a blender or hand-held electric mixer, beat the egg, mustard, salt, water and vinegar until light and frothy.  Add the oil a tablespoon at a time, beating thoroughly after each addition.  Once mixture begins to thicken, you can add oil more quickly.  Continue until mixture reaches the consistency of creamy mayonnaise.    NOTE: The more oil you add, the thicker it gets; you may not need the full cup of oil. In a large bowl, toss together the chicken, grapes, pecans, blue cheese and 1 cup of the mayonnaise.  Stir until evenly coated, adding more mayonnaise if necessary.  Refrigerate until serving.
Make the cheese sauce: Melt 3 tablespoons butter in a saucepan on top of the stove. Quickly stir the flour into the saucepan until the mixture is smooth. Stir in the milk, salt and pepper; continue stirring until the mixture is smooth and thick. Finally, stir in the cheese until it is melted. Grease a 9x13 inch baking pan. In a skillet, saute butter and onions. Pour the beaten eggs and ham into the skillet; scramble until set. Fold the mushrooms and cheese sauce into the eggs. Pour the mixture into the prepared baking pan. Cover and chill for 30 minutes or overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake the egg and mushroom casserole for 30 minutes in the 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) oven.
Preheat a griddle to medium heat. Beat eggs in a mixing bowl until frothy, about 2 minutes. Add flour, milk, baking powder, and vegetable oil to the eggs and mix to make a batter. Stir mashed bananas into the batter. Ladle batter in 1/4 cup portions onto hot griddle. Cook until tiny air bubbles form on top, 2 to 5 minutes; turn and continue cooking until the bottoms are browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Keep finished pancakes warm. Top pancakes with banana slices and maple syrup to serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly coat 24 mini-muffin cups with cooking spray. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium-low heat. Cook and stir chorizo in the hot oil until golden brown, about 4 minutes. Stir diced potato into chorizo; increase heat to medium and cook potatoes until tender, about 10 minutes. Season with salt and black pepper. Transfer to a plate lined with paper towels to drain. Sprinkle 1 to 2 teaspoons of grated cheese in the bottom of each muffin cup. Top with 1 to 2 tablespoons chorizo mixture. Beat eggs, cayenne pepper, and 1/2 teaspoon salt in a large bowl until combined. Pour egg mixture evenly into muffin cups. Lightly tap the pans to remove any air bubbles. Transfer to a baking sheet and top with any remaining cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs golden brown and just set, about 17 minutes.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease and flour 2 8x8-inch baking dishes. Sift flour, pumpkin pie spice, salt, baking soda, and baking powder together in a large bowl. Beat eggs, sugar, vegetable oil, pumpkin, and vanilla extract together in a second bowl until mixture is smooth and creamy. Stir wet ingredients into flour mixture until combined; gently fold in zucchini and walnuts. Divide batter into the prepared baking dishes. Bake in the preheated oven until cakes are lightly browned and a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 40 to 60 minutes. Allow to cool on rack for 20 minutes before removing from pans to finish cooling.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Spray 36 mini muffin cups with cooking spray. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat and crumble in sausage. Cook and stir until sausage is crumbly and evenly browned, about 10 minutes . Drain and discard any excess grease. Sprinkle sausage, Cheddar cheese, Swiss cheese, and green onion evenly into the prepared muffin cups. Beat eggs, potato flakes, and cream together in a bowl; season with salt and pepper. Pour egg mixture evenly over the sausage-cheese mixture in the muffin cups. Bake in the preheated oven until quiches are set in the middle and lightly browned, about 22 minutes. Cool for 5 minutes before serving.
Place the cherries, banana, lemon juice, yogurt, ice cubes, and almond extract into a blender. Cover, and puree until smooth. Pour into glasses to serve.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Sift flour, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk milk and egg yolks together in a separate bowl. Beat egg whites in a separate bowl using an electric mixer until stiff peaks form. Stir egg yolk mixture into flour mixture just until batter is moistened. Stir butter into batter and fold in egg whites. Ladle about 1/4 cup batter into preheated waffle iron and cook according to manufacturer's instructions until golden, about 5 minutes; repeat with remaining batter.
Beat eggs in a bowl with a fork. Add milk, salt, and pepper; beat until well mixed. Coat a small skillet with olive oil and heat over medium heat. Pour egg mixture into hot skillet; cook and stir until eggs are set, 3 to 5 minutes.
Strain cottage cheese in a sieve fitted over a bowl, pressing down occasionally, until cottage cheese has dried out, about 1 hour. Beat eggs in a medium bowl; add cottage cheese, flour, melted butter, and salt. Mix until just blended. Heat butter in a frying pan over medium-high heat; drop large spoonfuls of batter into the melted butter. Sprinkle blueberries into batter. Cook until lightly browned, 2 to 3 minutes per side.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8x8-inch baking dish. Heat butter and olive oil in a skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir onion in the heated butter-olive oil until onions soften, about 10 minutes. Transfer onion to a plate to cool. Whisk cream, eggs, salt, and black pepper in a bowl; stir in mozzarella cheese, Parmesan cheese, and onion. Pour mixture into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set and a knife inserted in the center comes out clean, about 35 minutes.
Prepare the cream cheese glaze by beating the cream cheese, confectioners' sugar, and 1 teaspoon vanilla extract in a bowl until smooth. Thin with 1 tablespoon milk or as needed to achieve a pourable consistency. Set aside. Whisk the flour, white sugar, baking powder, cocoa powder, and salt together in a bowl until evenly blended; set aside. Beat the eggs in a separate mixing bowl until smooth. Whisk in 1/4 cup milk with the buttermilk, 1 teaspoon vanilla extract, vinegar, and food coloring. Stir in the flour mixture until moistened. Drizzle in the melted butter, and stir until the butter has incorporated and small lumps of flour remain. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter. Drizzle with the cream cheese glaze to serve.
Butter a 9 x 11- inch baking dish. In a large mixing bowl, whisk together eggs, half and half, salt, pepper and hot sauce. Heat oil in a medium skillet; add onions and saute until tender, about 3 minutes. Add spinach and cook, tossing constantly until wilted. Place mixture in a colander and drain well by pressing spinach with the back of a large spoon. Transfer spinach to a clean cotton tea towel and carefully squeeze out the remaining moisture. Transfer spinach mixture to a cutting board and coarsely chop. Place bread pieces into prepared dish. Top with spinach, sausage and half of cheddar cheese. Pour egg mixture over all and top with remaining cheddar cheese and Parmesan cheese. Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate for 2 hours or overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Bake 45 to 55 minutes or until casserole puffs and center of casserole is set. If top of casserole is browning too quickly, cover loosely with aluminum foil during baking process. Allow 8 to 10 minutes of resting time before serving.
Preheat a waffle maker according to manufacturer's directions. Whisk whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour, oat flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk egg yolks, milk, canola oil, and vanilla extract in a separate bowl. Beat egg whites in a third bowl (not plastic) with an electric mixer until soft peaks form when you lift the beaters straight out of the beaten eggs, 1 to 2 minutes. Make a well in the dry ingredients and pour the milk mixture into the well; mix batter until smooth. Gently fold the egg whites into the batter, retaining as much volume as possible. Let batter stand until slightly thickened, about 5 minutes. Pour 1/2 cup of batter, or amount recommended by the manufacturer, onto the waffle maker; close lid and bake waffle until browned and crisp, 2 to 4 minutes.
Preheat an oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Arrange Tater Tots in a single layer on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until potato nuggets are partially cooked, 12 to 15 minutes. Remove from oven. Reduce oven temperature to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Spray a 9x13-inch casserole dish with cooking spray. While the potatoes bake, heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage, onion, chili powder, basil, and garlic in the hot skillet until sausage is browned and crumbly and onion is soft, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Whisk eggs and cream together in a bowl until evenly blended; season with pepper. Arrange partially-cooked potato nuggets in the prepared casserole dish; sprinkle with Cheddar cheese. Spread sausage mixture over cheese layer. Pour egg mixture over sausage layer. Bake in the preheated oven until set in the middle and lightly browned, 30 to 40 minutes. Allow to cool for 5 minutes before serving.
Mix oats, apple, milk, yogurt, banana, raisins, walnuts, almonds, brown sugar, honey, and orange juice together in a bowl. Chill in refrigerator for at least 1 hour to set.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Generously spray 12 muffin cups with cooking spray. Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat; add bacon. Cook gently until bacon begins to curl, 3 to 5 minutes. Add onion, garlic, and chard leaves; cook and stir until chard has wilted, stirring occasionally, 5 to 8 minutes. Transfer chard mixture to a large bowl; stir in zucchini, eggs, salt, and black pepper. Add flour and baking powder; mix until flour is evenly distributed and moistened. Stir in Swiss cheese. Spoon batter into prepared muffin tin. Bake in the preheated oven until edges of muffin turn golden brown, about 20 minutes.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease and flour an 8x4 inch loaf pan. In a separate bowl mash bananas to equal 1 cup and add oil, eggs, buttermilk and vanilla extract. Beat together and pour this mixture into the dry ingredients. Add nuts and stir just until combined. Pour batter into 8x4 inch loaf pan. Bake for 1 hour and 20 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a toothpick inserted into the cake comes out clean.
In a blender combine strawberries, banana, peaches, apples, and ice cream. Blend until smooth. Add ice, pour in milk and blend again until smooth. Serve immediately.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease two 8x4 inch loaf pans. In a medium bowl, stir together flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, cinnamon, and oats. In a large bowl, mix together honey, vegetable oil, eggs, and milk.  Mix in flour mixture until just  moistened.  Stir in cranberries and walnuts.  Divide batter into prepared pans equally. Cook for 40 to 45 minutes, or until a tester inserted in the center of the loaves comes out clean.
Place potatoes in a medium saucepan and cover with water. Bring to a boil, reduce heat to a simmer, and cook until potatoes are tender. Drain and set aside. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Stir in onion and cook until onions are golden in color, about 8 minutes. Add the ham and continue to cook and stir until the ham begins to brown. Transfer to a bowl and set aside. Heat remaining 2 tablespoons oil in the same skillet. Add the drained potatoes and saute until browned. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Stir in ham mixture and the parsley. Cook all together for a few more minutes and serve hot, topped with dollops of sour cream.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease the bottom of one 5x9 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl combine the flour, brown sugar, baking powder, salt, butter, egg, orange zest, milk and orange juice. Beat at low speed just until moistened. Then beat at medium speed for 2 minutes. Fold in the blueberries and spread into the prepared pan. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 60 to 70 minutes or until a toothpick poked into the center of the loaf comes out clean. Cool in pan for 10 minutes then invert onto a wire rack to cool completely before serving.
Cook bacon in a skillet over medium-high heat until crisp. Remove with a slotted spoon to paper towels to drain and cool; crumble the bacon and set aside. Melt the butter in a skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir the onions in the butter until tender, about 10 minutes. Prepare a 10-inch non-stick skillet with cooking spray and place over a cold burner. Whisk together the eggs and water; pour the egg mixture into the cold skillet. Cover and turn the burner on for medium-low heat. Cook until steam begins to vent from the skillet. Remove the lid. Sprinkle the crumbled bacon, Cheddar cheese, American cheese, salt, and red pepper over the eggs. Spread the onions over the eggs. Gently swirl the skillet in a circular motion to release the omelet and slide it onto a plate. Fold the omelet in half. Allow the cheese to melt, about 2 minutes.
Preheat waffle iron according to manufacturer's directions; spray lightly with vegetable cooking spray. Combine flour, baking powder, soda, salt, cinnamon, ginger, and nutmeg in a large bowl. Set aside. Combine oil, molasses, pumpkin and buttermilk in a small bowl; set aside. Whisk together egg and SPLENDA(R) Granulated Sweetener until blended. Add buttermilk mixture, whisking until blended. Add to dry ingredients, stirring just until moistened. Pour batter into a hot waffle iron and bake approximately 5 minutes*. Serve with maple syrup.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place flour, sugar, and pepper into a resealable plastic bag and shake to mix. Shake bacon with flour mixture a few strips at a time to coat. Place coated bacon onto a baking sheet or broiler pan. Bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes or until bacon has cooked to desired doneness.
Mix potatoes, carrot, onion, garlic, parsley, and dill in a large bowl. Stir in lemon juice, 1/4 cup of olive oil, flour, bread crumbs, salt, and pepper. Knead just until mixture holds together. Heat the remaining 1/4 cup olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Working in batches, drop spoonfuls of potato mixture in hot oil. Cook approximately 4 minutes per side, or until golden brown. Serve hot.
Combine blueberries, banana, almond milk, and almond butter in a blender; blend until smooth, adding water for a thinner smoothie.
Place water into a 3-quart saucepan with a lid. Place over high heat and bring to a low boil. Carefully place the eggs in the water. Cover pan immediately, reduce heat to medium-high, and cook for 9 1/2 minutes. Remove pan from heat and cool eggs down with cold running water, tipping out the water, and continuing to run cold water over the eggs until they are cool.
Combine eggs, cream cheese, stevia, and cinnamon in a blender; blend until smooth. Let batter sit until bubbles settle, about 2 minutes. Heat a large skillet over medium heat. Pour 1/4 of the batter onto the skillet; cook until golden brown, about 2 minutes. Flip and continue cooking until second side is golden brown, about 1 minute more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend ice cubes, milk, banana, protein powder, peanut butter, honey, and cocoa powder together in a blender until smooth.
In a bowl, beat together the eggs, milk, and cheese. Season with salt. Pour into a skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir until scrambled. Season mashed avocados with salt. Place tortillas one at a time in a separate skillet over medium heat, and cook just until warm. Spread equal amounts of the avocado mixture on one side of each warmed tortilla. Layer with equal amounts cottage cheese and scrambled eggs. Roll into burritos and serve with ketchup.
Place potatoes in a saucepan and add enough water to cover. Bring to a boil, and cook until just starting to be tender, about 5 minutes. Drain and place under cool running water to cool, then drain and pat dry. Grate into a large bowl. Separate the potato shreds into two sections, and place each one on a square of waxed paper. Pat each section into a 6 inch circle. Place bacon in a skillet over medium-high heat. Fry until evenly browned, then set aside to drain on paper towels. In a nonstick skillet over low heat, cook eggs until lightly scrambled. Eggs need to stay slightly wet. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat. While the oil heats, place the egg, bacon strips and cheese in even layers on top of one of the potato circles. Place the other circle on the top, using the waxed paper to pick it up. Place the whole hash-brown sandwich into the skillet, and fry until nicely browned on both sides, about 10 minutes per side. Cut into wedges, and serve hot.
Heat the oil in a medium skillet over medium heat, and fry the tortillas until lightly browned and crisp. Mix the onion, tomato, and serrano chile peppers into the skillet. Season with salt and pepper. Continue to cook and stir until onions are tender. Stir the eggs into the skillet, and cook until firm.
Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). In a medium bowl, whisk together the oil, hot water and honey. In a large bowl, stir together the oats, almonds, pecans, and walnuts. Pour the honey mixture into the oat mixture and stir until the oats and nuts are evenly coated. Spread out the granola onto 2 baking sheets. Bake for 10 minutes, stir, and bake 10 more minutes, or until toasted. Allow granola to cool completely before stirring in the raisins, golden raisins and dried cherries. Granola will harden as it cools. Break apart any large lumps, and store in an airtight container at room temperature.
Place ingredients in the pan of the bread machine in the order recommended by the manufacturer. Select cycle; press Start. If your machine has a Fruit setting, add the bananas and nuts at the signal, or about 5 minutes before the kneading cycle has finished.
Lightly butter a 9x13 inch baking dish. Cut bread slices into 1/2 inch cubes. Line bottom of pan with one half of bread cubes. Sprinkle cheddar cheese and 1 cup Swiss cheese on top of bread cubes, reserve 1/2 cup Swiss cheese. Spread remaining bread cubes on top of cheese. Mix the eggs, milk, onion powder and mustard. Pour egg mixture over the bread. Sprinkle the remaining 1/2 cup cheese over the egg mixture.  Cover with foil and refrigerate overnight. The next morning, preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Place cornflakes in a bowl and drizzle with melted margarine. Spread cornflakes on top of casserole. Bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes covered, then uncover and bake for an additional 15 minutes.
Mix beaten eggs, sugar, milk, cinnamon, and salt in a large, shallow bowl. Dip bread slices into egg mixture to coat. Heat a skillet over medium heat. Cook bread in hot skillet until browned completely, 2 to 3 minutes per side.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Sprinkle 1/4 cup Cheddar cheese in pastry shell. Mix chicken, spinach, onion, and remaining 3/4 cup Cheddar cheese in a bowl; transfer mixture to pastry shell. Whisk eggs, half-and-half, mayonnaise, salt, black pepper, seasoning blend, and herbes de Provence in another bowl; pour over chicken mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, 35 to 40 minutes. Let stand for 15 minutes before slicing and serving.
Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir asparagus until slightly tender, 5 to 10 minutes. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Press pie pastry into a 10-inch deep-dish pie pan. Combine asparagus, eggs, milk, half-and-half, French-fried onions, Swiss cheese, Cheddar cheese, and green onion in a bowl. Pour into prepared pie pastry. Bake in the preheated oven until center of quiche is set and a knife inserted in the middle comes out clean, about 45 minutes. Allow to stand for 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Place asparagus in a baking dish and drizzle with 1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil.
                                    Watch Now Heat 1 tablespoon olive oil in a skillet over medium-low heat. Add prosciutto; cook, stirring, until golden and rendered, 3 to 4 minutes. Sprinkle prosciutto and oil over asparagus. Season with black pepper and toss to coat. Roast in the preheated oven for 10 minutes. Toss and return to oven until firm yet tender to the bite, 5 minutes.
                                    Watch Now Fill a large saucepan with 2 to 3 inches of water and bring to a boil over high heat. Reduce heat to medium-low, pour in vinegar and pinch of salt. Crack an egg into a bowl then gently slip the egg into the water. Repeat with remaining eggs. Poach eggs until whites are firm and yolks have thickened but are not hard, 4 to 6 minutes. Remove eggs from water with a slotted spoon, dab on a kitchen towel to remove excess water, then transfer to a warm plate.
                                    Watch Now Drizzle asparagus with lemon juice. Transfer asparagus to plates, top with poached egg and pinch of lemon zest. Season with black pepper and serve.
                                    Watch Now
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Pour melted butter into a glass 9x13-inch baking dish. Tilt dish to coat bottom with butter. Beat eggs, Cheddar cheese, seasoned salt, hot pepper sauce, and mustard powder together with a whisk in a large bowl. Stream milk into egg mixture while whisking; pour into the baking dish. Bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes, stir, and continue baking until eggs are set in the middle, 15 to 20 minutes more. Serve immediately.
Whisk coconut milk, applesauce, eggs, honey, vanilla extract, cinnamon, sea salt, and baking soda together in a bowl. Slowly stir coconut flour into coconut milk mixture until flour is just moistened. Set aside until coconut flour absorbs some of the batter moisture, 3 to 5 minutes. Heat coconut oil on a griddle over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Beat egg whites in a glass or metal bowl until soft peaks form. Lift your beater or whisk straight up: the egg whites will form soft mounds rather than a sharp peak. Beat egg yolks, buttermilk, pumpkin, and butter together with a whisk in a large bowl until smooth; add flour, brown sugar, baking powder, cinnamon, baking soda, ginger, salt, and cloves. Stir the mixture with the whisk just until you have a smooth batter. Fold the egg whites into the batter just until combined. Prepare cooking surfaces of your waffle iron with cooking spray. Ladle about 2/3 cup batter into the prepared iron and cook until browned, 4 to 5 minutes.
Mix banana and eggs together in a bowl until smooth. Add ground flax seed and vanilla extract; mix batter well. Heat coconut oil in a small skillet over medium-low heat. Scoop batter, about 1/4 cup per pancake, onto the skillet and cook until the center starts to bubble, about 30 seconds. Flip pancakes and cook until bottoms are lightly browned, 1 to 2 minutes more.
Spray the crock of your slow cooker with cooking spray. Spread hash brown potatoes into the bottom of the crock. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Spread sausage over the hash brown potatoes; top with Cheddar cheese. Beat eggs and milk together in a large bowl; add ground mustard and generously season with salt and pepper. Mix seasonings thoroughly into the egg mixture; pour over the cheese layer in the slow cooker. Cook on Low for 6 to 8 hours.
Stir water, almond milk, blueberries, bananas, oats, honey, vanilla extract, cinnamon, and salt together in the crock of a slow cooker. Cook on Low for 5 to 8 hours.
Sprinkle 1 teaspoon salt over zucchini and let sit for 10 minutes to drain water. Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (235 degrees C). Line pastry shell with a double thickness of heavy-duty aluminum foil. Bake pastry shell in preheated oven for 5 minutes; remove foil and bake until shell is lightly browned, about 5 minutes longer. Reduce oven heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion, green pepper, tomatoes, mushrooms, garlic, and zucchini until just tender, about 5 minutes. Stir in curry powder, 1/2 teaspoon salt, pepper, and cinnamon; spoon vegetable mixture into crust. Beat eggs in a bowl; stir in milk, Parmesan cheese, and Cheddar cheese. Carefully pour egg mixture over vegetables. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted near the center comes out clean, 40 to 45 minutes. Let stand 5 minutes before cutting.
Mix half-and-half, eggs, vanilla, and 1 tablespoon dark brown sugar together in a large shallow bowl; add French bread. Cover bowl with plastic wrap and refrigerate 8 hours to overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place butter in a 9x13-inch casserole dish. Place casserole dish in the preheating oven to melt butter, about 5 minutes. Swirl butter over bottom of the dish. Spread brown sugar, maple syrup, and pecans over the melted butter. Arrange soaked bread atop pecan mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until French toast is cooked through, 30 to 35 minutes. Sprinkle with confectioners' sugar.
Heat oven to 375 degrees F. Cook chorizo in large ovenproof skillet on medium-high heat until done, stirring frequently. Remove chorizo from skillet, reserving drippings in skillet. Set chorizo aside. Add spinach to skillet; cook 2 min. or just until wilted, stirring frequently. Stir in tomatoes and onions. Remove from heat. Whisk eggs and milk in medium bowl until blended; stir in 1 cup cheese. Add to ingredients in skillet; stir just until blended. Top with remaining cheese. Bake 25 min. or until knife inserted in center comes out clean.
Place oats in microwave-safe container that can hold at least 4 cups. Stir in the flaxseed and salt.  Whisk together the water and egg whites, pour over the oats and stir gently until just combined.  Microwave on MEDIUM power for 4-6 minutes (depending on your microwave). Remove bowl from the microwave, and stir in the peanut butter, sugar, and cinnamon.  If the oatmeal becomes to stiff, soften with a small amount of milk.  Serve warm.
Lightly grease a microwave-safe 9x5 inch loaf pan; sprinkle pan with cornmeal. In a large bowl, dissolve yeast in water. Add milk, sugar, salt, soda and whole wheat flour; beat well. Beat in all-purpose flour, 1/2 cup at a time, until a soft dough is formed. Turn dough out onto a lightly floured surface, and knead for about 5 minutes, or until smooth. Form into a loaf, and place into the prepared pan. Place in microwave oven uncovered, at 50 percent power, for 1 minute. Let rest for 10 minutes. Repeat 1 or 2 times until loaf has doubled in size. Microwave on high for 4 to 6 minutes, until top is no longer moist.  Let stand for 5 minutes in pan. Remove and cool on a rack.
Rub the frozen bread dough with vegetable oil, cover and allow to thaw overnight at room temperature. Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Roll out one loaf of bread and place on an ungreased cookie sheet. Layer cooked sausage, green peppers, mushrooms, and cheese on top of bread. Leave 1 inch border at the edges bare. Roll out second loaf of bread and place over bread and filling. Enclose filling by pinching edges of both loaves together. In a small bowl, beat together egg and water. Brush surface of roll with egg wash. Bake in preheated oven for 25 to 30 minutes, or until golden brown.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 9x5-inch loaf pans or one Bundt pan. Mix sugar, cinnamon, nutmeg and cloves. Set aside. Slice biscuits into quarters. Drop cut biscuits into sugar and spice mixture. Place sugar and spice-coated biscuits into prepared pan(s). Melt butter and mix it with the remaining sugar and spice mixture. Pour over biscuits in pan. Bake in preheated oven until golden brown, 25 to 30 minutes. Cool bread in pan for 5 to 10 minutes, then invert onto serving plate. Serve warm.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Generously grease a 9-inch pie pan. Spread shredded cheese across bottom of pie pan. Cover cheese with meat and vegetables. In a blender, combine eggs, baking mix, salt, garlic powder, onions, parsley, and milk. Blend until smooth, then add olive oil. Blend until combined, then pour mixture over meat and vegetable layer. Sprinkle with paprika. Bake in preheated oven for 40 minutes. Cool 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 350  degrees F (175 degrees C). Place pita bread in oven to warm. Heat a medium skillet over high heat. Coat with cooking spray. Add potatoes and saute until lightly browned, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to medium and add eggs. Mix gently until eggs are firm, about 45 seconds. Season with salt and pepper. Remove pita from oven. Stuff pita with potato and egg mixture. Eat immediately.
Juice everything in juice machine.  Pour over ice to serve.
In a medium nonstick saucepan over medium heat, cook and stir the onion, garlic, mushrooms and pepper until tender, about 5 minutes Mix in shrimp, and cook until opaque. Remove from heat, and set aside. In a medium bowl, beat together eggs and milk. Mix in curry powder, salt and pepper. Heat the olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Pour in egg mixture, and cook 5 minutes, or until firm. Top with Cheddar cheese, tomato and the onion and shrimp mixture. Fold eggs over filling, and serve warm.
Preheat the oven to 325 degrees  F (165 degrees C). In a large bowl, stir together the oats, wheat germ, coconut, sunflower seeds and almonds. In a separate bowl, mix together the oil, honey, boiling water, brown sugar, salt and vanilla. Pour the liquid ingredients into the dry ingredients, and stir until evenly coated. Spread in a thin layer on a large baking sheet. Bake for 60 to 90 minutes in the preheated oven. Stir every 30 minutes, until lightly toasted and fragrant. Granola will crisp up more when cooled.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray an 8x8 inch baking dish with cooking spray. Heat the olive oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Place zucchini, green onions, onion, tomatoes, mushrooms, and spinach in the skillet. Sprinkle with lemon juice, Worcestershire sauce, and hot sauce. Season with garlic powder, salt, and pepper. Cook until tender. Transfer to the prepared baking dish. Pour egg substitute over the vegetables in the dish. Top with cheese. Bake 20 minutes in the preheated oven, or until egg substitute is set and cheese is melted. Cut with a spatula and enjoy!
In a skillet over medium heat, scramble eggs until almost done. Remove to a plate. Return skillet to medium heat, and stir in tomatoes. Cook 2 to 3 minutes. Stir in sugar, salt, and soy. Return eggs to skillet; cook, stirring, about 1 minute more.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Unroll crescent dough, leaving it in one piece. Line a 8x8 inch baking dish with the dough; it should extend 1 inch up the sides. Prick dough with fork. Bake crust in preheated oven until golden, about 10 minutes. Layer the chopped ham, roasted red peppers, spinach, and Cheddar cheese in the baked crust. Beat eggs, milk, black pepper, and hot pepper sauce in a large bowl. Pour egg mixture over layered ingredients. Bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes. Turn oven to Broil and cook until browned, about 3 additional minutes. Turn off oven; allow quiche to rest for 10 minutes in cooling oven.
Place a skillet over medium heat. Place the lightly beaten eggs in a bowl; stir in the ham, feta cheese, basil, salt, and pepper. Melt the butter in the skillet. Pour in the egg mixture; cook and stir eggs until firmed and no longer runny, about 5 minutes.
Heat the sunflower seed oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Stir in the tomatoes, and evenly coat in the oil. Mix in the tomato paste, and season with cumin, allspice, and salt. Cover, and cook until the tomatoes are tender, about 10 minutes. Pour the eggs over the tomato mixture. Cover, and continue cooking 10 minutes, or until the eggs are no longer runny.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease three 8x4-inch loaf pans. Line bottoms with parchment paper, if desired. Beat the butter and sugar with an electric mixer in a large bowl until light and fluffy. Add the room-temperature eggs one at a time, allowing each egg to blend into the butter mixture before adding the next. Stir in the orange zest. Sift together the flour, salt, baking powder and baking soda. Add to the egg mixture, alternating with orange juice. Coarsely chop the cranberries. Pour the flour mixture into the mixing bowl alternately with the orange juice, mixing until just incorporated. Fold in the chopped cranberries and walnuts, mixing just enough to evenly combine. Divide the batter evenly among prepared pans. Bake in the preheated oven for 30 minutes. Check for browning: cover the tops with aluminum foil to prevent them from becoming too dark. Bake until a toothpick inserted in the center of the loaves comes out clean, about 30 minutes more. Cool on wire racks.
Preheat an oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Mix chicken, red bell pepper, spinach, Cheddar cheese, mayonnaise, lemon zest, salt, and nutmeg together in a large bowl. Set aside. Unroll crescent roll dough, and separate into 16 triangles. Arrange triangles in a circle on a 13-inch baking stone or pizza pan with the wide ends of the triangles overlapping in the center and points facing out. The center diameter should be about 5-inches. Scoop chicken mixture evenly onto the widest end of each triangle. Bring the outer point of each triangle towards the center of the circle and tuck the point under the wide end of the dough. The filling will not be completely covered. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, 20 to 25 minutes. Slice and serve.
Place the nectarines, frozen banana chunks, orange, vanilla yogurt, orange juice, and honey into a blender, and blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly butter 2 muffin tins. Mix flour and baking powder together in a large bowl; cut in butter until mixture resembles coarse crumbs. Stir buttermilk and bacon into flour mixture just until dough holds together. Turn dough onto a floured surface and roll into an even thickness. Fold dough over itself a few times. Cut dough into circles using a cookie or biscuit cutter and arrange circles in the prepared muffin tins. Bake in the preheated oven on the top rack until biscuits are lightly browned, 20 to 25 minutes.
Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Cook and stir bacon in a large oven-proof skillet over medium heat until evenly browned and crispy, about 10 minutes. Drain all but 1 teaspoon bacon grease from the skillet. Stir potato slices, water, garlic, red pepper flakes, salt, and black pepper into bacon; cover the skillet with a lid and cook until potatoes are tender, about 10 minutes. Mix Swiss chard into potato mixture; cook and stir until chard is slightly wilted, 2 to 3 minutes. Pour eggs over potato-chard mixture, stir gently, and remove skillet from heat. Top egg mixture with Parmesan cheese. Broil in the preheated oven until eggs are set and frittata is golden brown around the edges, 3 to 4 minutes.
Pour apple juice into a blender; top with pear, apple, spinach, cinnamon, and ice in that order. Cover and blend until smooth.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Blend oats, cottage cheese, eggs, egg whites, honey, vanilla extract, and cinnamon in a blender until creamy. Ladle batter into preheated waffle iron according to manufacturer directions and cook the waffles until golden and crisp, about 5 minutes. Repeat until entire batch of batter is used.
Blend banana, avocado, spinach, milk, ice cubes, honey, and vanilla extract together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat a large, heavy skillet over medium-high heat. Add 2 tablespoons oil. Break tofu apart over skillet into bite-size pieces, sprinkle with salt and pepper, then cook, stirring frequently with a thin metal spatula, until liquid cooks out and tofu browns, about 10 minutes. (If you notice liquid collecting in pan, increase heat to evaporate water.) Be sure to get under the tofu when you stir, scraping the bottom of the pan where the good, crispy stuff is and keeping it from sticking. Add onion and garlic powders, turmeric, juice, and remaining tablespoon oil and toss to coat. Cook 5 minutes more. Preheat a heavy-bottomed saucepan over medium-high heat. Add oil. Cook onion and jalapenos with a pinch of salt, stirring, until translucent, about 5 minutes, Add garlic and cook, stirring, until fragrant, about 30 seconds. Add tomatoes, cumin, and remaining salt, and cook, stirring, until tomatoes become saucy, about 5 minutes. Add cilantro and lemon juice. Let cilantro wilt in. Add beans and heat through, stirring occasionally, about 2 minutes. Taste for salt and seasoning. Spoon some hash browns into each bowl, followed by a scoop of beans and a scoop of scramble. Top with avocado, a squeeze of fresh lemon juice, and a sprinkle of cilantro. Serve with hot sauce.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Lightly coat a muffin tin with oil. Heat coconut oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Add mushrooms and onion; saute until tender, about 5 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Line 8 muffin cups with 1 slice of ham each. Place a spoonful of mushroom mixture in each cup and crack 1 egg on top. Bake in the preheated oven until egg whites are completely set, about 15 minutes. Top with black pepper.
Mix flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Whisk milk, eggs, and melted butter together in a separate bowl. Pour milk mixture into flour mixture. Whisk until well blended. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Drop batter by 1/4 cup measures onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until crispy, 5 to 8 minutes. Drain on paper towels; reserve most of the bacon fat in skillet. Reduce heat to medium. Cook and stir onions until starting to soften, about 5 minutes. Add potatoes; toss to coat evenly in bacon fat. Pour in water and cover skillet with a large lid. Cook, checking occasionally, until potatoes are tender, about 20 minutes. Add green onions, garlic, and paprika. Season with salt and pepper. Make 4 wells in the potato mixture using a wooden spoon, revealing the bottom of the skillet. Crack an egg into each well; season with salt and pepper. Sprinkle cooked bacon and Cheddar cheese over the entire skillet. Replace lid; cook until egg whites are set and yolks are still runny, about 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Cut a piece of heavy duty aluminum foil about twice as long as a rimmed baking sheet. Pinch and fold every inch or so of the foil to create ridges for the bacon to drain into while cooking. Place bacon side by side on the ridged foil. Bake in preheat oven to your desired level of doneness and a bit of foam forms on the surface, 25 to 30 minutes.
Heat oven to 400 degrees F. Spray 13x9-inch (3-quart) glass baking dish with cooking spray. In 10-inch skillet, cook sausage, bell pepper and onion over medium heat, stirring occasionally, until sausage is no longer pink; drain. Mix sausage mixture, potatoes and 1 1/2 cups of the cheese in baking dish. In medium bowl, stir Bisquick mix, milk, pepper and eggs until blended. Pour over sausage mixture in baking dish. Bake 30 to 35 minutes or until knife inserted in center comes out clean. Sprinkle with remaining 1/2 cup cheese. Bake about 3 minutes longer or until cheese is melted. Let stand 5 minutes before serving.
Mix the tomato juice, beef consomme, Worcestershire sauce, lemon juice, hot pepper sauce, celery salt, and black pepper together in a pitcher; chill.
In a small bowl, mix together the cream cheese, sugar, and 1/8 teaspoon of cinnamon until thoroughly combined. Spread cream cheese mixture onto 4 slices of raisin bread. Top each spread slice with another slice of raisin bread to make 4 sandwiches. In a shallow bowl, beat the eggs with milk and 1/8 teaspoon of cinnamon. Dip each sandwich into the egg mixture on both sides. Grease a skillet with butter, and place over medium heat. Brown the sandwiches in the skillet for about 2 minutes per side.
Blend milk, bananas, and sugar substitute in a blender or food processor until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Mix flour, sugar, and baking soda in a bowl. Stir in bacon bits, butter, and egg until well blended. Fold corn flakes and Cheddar cheese into flour mixture. Drop spoonfuls of the dough 2 inches apart onto prepared baking sheet. Bake in preheated oven until golden brown, 13 to 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Fit pie crust into a 9-inch pie dish. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir green onions and garlic until green onions are softened, about 5 minutes. Cook and stir turkey bacon in the green onion mixture until fragrant. Stir spinach, shiitake mushrooms, and broccoli into green onion mixture; cook and stir vegetables until softened, 5 to 7 minutes. Mix in 1/4 cup Cheddar cheese. Spoon vegetable mixture into the pie crust. Beat eggs, milk, sea salt, and black pepper together in a bowl; pour egg mixture gently over vegetable filling, slightly stirring eggs into the filling to combine. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes; sprinkle 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese over the top of the quiche and bake 10 additional minutes. Cover quiche with aluminum foil and bake until quiche has set and a toothpick inserted into the quiche comes out clean, about 10 more minutes. Allow quiche to cool for 5 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper or a silicone mat. Combine oats, whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour, brown sugar, wheat germ, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a large bowl. Add banana, applesauce, egg whites, and vanilla extract; mix well. Gently fold chocolate chips and cranberries into the batter. Drop batter, about 1 tablespoon at a time, onto the prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, about 12 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, combine the sugar, flour, cinnamon walnuts, apples, and cheese. Add the eggs, melted butter or margarine, and milk; stir until well blended. Pour into prepared loaf pan. Bake in preheated oven for 1 hour, or until done.  If loaf starts to brown too much, cover with foil.
Mix together flour, sugar, baking powder and salt.  Cut in shortening until mixture resembles coarse crumbs.  Add water, egg, and vinegar.  Mix together but do not work too much. Divide pastry into two pieces, cover and chill for 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Form each piece into a round and roll out crust on lightly floured surface. Carefully fit into two 10 inch tart pans. Blind bake tart shells in preheated oven until golden brown.  Let cool. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble, and set aside. Saute onion in butter until translucent.  Divide ham, bacon and onion into two equal portions and sprinkle over the bottom of tart shells. Whisk together cream and beaten eggs. Add salt, pepper, nutmeg, basil, and thyme, and stir well. Pour egg mixture over bacon mixture. Sprinkle cream cheese cubes and grated Cheddar and Monterey Jack cheeses over the top of each filled tart.  Sprinkle green onions over cheese, followed by sliced almonds. Bake in preheated 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) oven for 30 to 40 minutes.  Let cool slightly, then cut and serve.
In a medium bowl, beat together egg whites, 1/4 cup reduced-fat Cheddar cheese and 1/4 cup salsa. In a medium non-stick skillet over medium-high heat, brown both sides of the tortilla. Remove from heat. In the same skillet over medium-high heat, scramble the egg white mixture until no longer runny. Top tortilla with the scrambled egg mixture, remaining cheese and remaining salsa. Season with salt and pepper.
Whisk together eggs, milk, vanilla extract, cinnamon, and ginger in a bowl until smooth. Stir in the baking mix until moistened, then add the bananas and chocolate chips, and stir to mix. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Flip over once bubbles appear on the top. Cook until browned on the other side. Serve hot.
Place the bacon in a skillet and cook over medium heat until evenly browned and crisp. Remove, and drain on paper towels. When cooled, crumble into small pieces. Stir the eggs and 1/4 cup Cheddar cheese together in a bowl until blended. Season to taste with salt and pepper. Pour the egg mixture into a skillet over medium heat. When the bottom of the eggs is set, layer with the bacon, ham, and if using, onion, chives, mushrooms, green pepper, jalapeno or hot pepper sauce. . Season with hot pepper sauce, if desired. Sprinkle with the remaining 1/4 cup Cheddar cheese. Carefully fold one half of the egg mixture over the filling ingredients. Cook until the cheese melts and the bottom is golden; turn and cook the other side until golden. Remove from the heat. Set two slices of toast on two serving plates, and spread each slice with mayonnaise, if desired. Cut the egg mixture in half, and place one half on each piece of toast. Top each with the remaining toast, cut each omwich in half, and serve immediately.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Arrange the tater tots in a single layer on a large baking sheet. Bake for about 10 minutes, so that they are no longer frozen but not completely cooked. Remove from the oven and allow to cool. Place bacon slices in a skillet over medium heat. Fry bacon until cooked through but still flexible. Drain on paper towels. Break each slice of cheese into small pieces. Each slice should make about 16 pieces. Place a piece of cheese against the side of a tater tot. Wrap with a piece of the bacon and secure with a toothpick. Place on a baking sheet. Repeat until you run out of tots. Bake for about 30 minutes in the preheated oven, until the bacon is crisp.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a quiche dish or a 9-inch pie pan, and set aside. Place the zucchini, onion, eggs, Parmesan cheese, feta cheese, parsley, salt, and pepper into the work bowl of a food processor, and process for about 1 minute, until all the ingredients are finely chopped and blended. Add the flour and baking powder, and process 1 more minute, scraping the side of the bowl if necessary. Place the mozzarella cheese into the work bowl, and process for about 1 minute, to combine the cheese thoroughly into the mixture. Scrape the mixture into the prepared quiche dish, sprinkle with paprika, and bake for 1 hour, or until set. The quiche is done when a knife inserted into the center comes out clean.
Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add the asparagus, mushrooms and onions; cook and stir until the asparagus is fairly soft, about 4 minutes. Whisk together the eggs and milk in a small bowl; pour over the sauteed vegetables and reduce the heat to medium. While the omelet cooks, lift the edge to allow the uncooked egg to flow underneath. When most of the egg is cooked, sprinkle Parmesan cheese over the top. Allow the cheese to melt slightly, then fold in half and serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease three 8x4 inch loaf pans. In a large bowl, stir together flour, baking soda and salt. In a separate bowl, beat together bananas, butter, brown sugar and eggs. Stir banana mixture into flour mixture, just until combined. Fold in nuts. Pour batter into prepared pans. Bake in preheated oven for 30 to 45 minutes, until a toothpick inserted into the center of the loaf comes out clean. Let bread rest in pans for 10 minutes, ten remove loaves from pans and allow to cool on a wire rack.
In a blender combine banana, nutmeg, vanilla, milk and crushed ice. Blend until smooth. Pour into glasses and serve.
In a large bowl mix the starter, egg, vegetable oil, sugar and vanilla together. Stir in the salt, buckwheat flour, all-purpose flour, baking soda and ginger. Mix until just combined. Adjust consistency with more flour or some water, depending upon how thick your starter is. The batter should be pourable, but not runny. Heat a griddle to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Lightly grease griddle and ladle 1/4 to 1/3 cup of batter onto hot greased griddle. Cook for about 3 to 4 minutes or until top is full of bubbles. Use a spatula to turnover and cook other side for and additional 2 minutes or so. Serve hot!
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease a 9 x 5 inch loaf pan. In a large bowl, cream butter or margarine and sugar together.  Add eggs, and continue mixing until light and fluffy.  Add baking soda, salt, and vanilla; mix thoroughly.  Alternately add buttermilk and flour to the creamed mixture, mixing only enough to hold ingredients together. Fold in cherries and nuts, mixing lightly.  Turn batter into prepared pan. Bake for 50 to 60 minutes, or until bread tests done.  Cool completely before slicing.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a 9x13 inch pan and sprinkle with 3 tablespoons of Parmesan cheese. Place 1/2 tablespoon vegetable oil in a medium size frying pan, heat on medium-high. Add sesame seeds and stir constantly until seeds are lightly browned. In a large mixing bowl, combine vegetable oil, onion, garlic, zucchini, eggs, bread crumbs, salt, basil, oregano, pepper and Cheddar cheese; stir until well combined.  Press mixture into prepared baking pan. Sprinkle Parmesan cheese and sesame seeds over the zucchini mixture. Bake 30 minutes or until set when lightly touched in the center. Let cool at least 15 minutes before cutting into 1 inch squares.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Cook bacon in large skillet until crisp. Reserve 2 tablespoons of the drippings. Drain bacon on paper towels; crumble and set aside. Add onion to drippings in skillet; cook and stir 3 minutes or until softened. Spread 1/2 of the bread cubes in 13x9-inch baking dish. Layer with 1/2 each of the onion, bacon, Cheddar cheese and mozzarella cheese. Spread evenly with cottage cheese. Top with remaining bread cubes, onion, bacon, Cheddar cheese and mozzarella cheese. Beat eggs in medium bowl until foamy. Add milk, mustard, nutmeg and pepper; beat until well blended. Pour evenly over top. Press bread cubes lightly into egg mixture until completely covered. Let stand 10 minutes. Bake 40 to 50 minutes or until center is set and top is golden brown.
Place 1/4 of the potatoes, onion, eggs, salt, flour, and baking powder in the work bowl of a food processor; pulse several times until the vegetables are finely chopped. Add the rest of the potatoes, and pulse again until all the potatoes are finely chopped and the mixture is thoroughly combined. Heat canola oil in a skillet over medium heat. Scoop up about 1/3 cup of the potato mixture per latke, and place into the hot oil. Fry the patty until brown and crisp on the bottom, flip it, and cook the other side until brown, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Repeat with the rest of the potato mixture, replenishing the oil as needed. Serve hot.
Place the bananas, figs, milk, and orange juice into a blender. Cover, and puree until smooth. Pour into glasses to serve.
Preheat an oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Whisk together the eggs, milk, salsa, bell pepper, onion, and Mexican-style cheese in a bowl. Season with salt and pepper. Set aside. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat and stir in the ground beef. Cook and stir until the beef is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink, 8 to 10 minutes. Drain and discard any excess grease. Stir in the taco seasoning, then spread the meat mixture into the pie crust. Pour the egg mixture over the beef. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center of the quiche comes out clean, 45 minutes to 1 hour. Cool for 10 minutes before serving warm.
Mix the rolled oats and buttermilk together in a large bowl; allow to soak 15 minutes. Whisk the all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a separate large bowl. Beat the eggs and milk together in a separate small bowl; mix into the soaked oats. Stir the flour mixture into the oat mixture. If the batter seems dry, add milk about 1 tablespoon at a time until the desired consistency is achieved. Grease a skillet or griddle and place over medium heat. Ladle about 1/2 cup of batter per pancake onto your preheated cooking surface. Cook until the pancake is lightly golden brown, about 2 minutes, flip, and continue cooking to brown other side, another 1-2 minutes.
Process oats in a blender or food processor until the consistency of flour. Combine ground oats, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt in a bowl. Whisk eggs, honey, almond milk, 1 tablespoon coconut oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Stir oat mixture into egg mixture until batter is well mixed; fold in blueberries. Heat 1 teaspoon coconut oil on a griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Beat eggs, coconut flour, 2 tablespoons melted oil, stevia sweetener, and vanilla extract together in a bowl with a whisk until smooth. Melt 1 teaspoon coconut oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Tilt skillet to swirl oil around to cover cooking surface. Pour batter into the skillet and cook until browned, 2 to 3 minutes per side.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Whisk flour, white sugar, baking powder, and 1 teaspoon salt together in a large bowl. Beat warm milk, 1/3 cup melted butter, eggs, and 1 teaspoon vanilla extract together in another bowl. Add milk mixture to flour mixture and stir until batter is lumpy and just-moistened. Working in batches, ladle batter into preheated waffle iron and cook until waffles are golden and crisp, 3 to 5 minutes. Stir brown sugar, 1/2 cup melted butter, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Beat confectioners' sugar, cream cheese, 1/4 cup softened butter, 1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract, and 1/8 teaspoon salt together in another bowl. Place waffles on a plate and drizzle cinnamon mixture and cream cheese mixture over the top.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Combine flour, sugar, baking powder and salt in a medium mixing bowl. Whisk together egg, bananas, oil and vanilla. Add to flour mixture and stir until flour is moistened. Fold in walnuts. Spray 8-1/2 x 4-1/2 loaf pan with cooking spray. Pour batter into prepared loaf pan. Bake for 35 to 40 minutes or until puffed and golden brown. A wooden pick inserted in the center should come out clean. Transfer loaf pan to a rack to cool for 10 minutes before turning out of pan. Serve warm or store in an air-tight container.
Heat a skillet over medium-high heat. Add chorizo, breaking it apart until crumbly. Saute until it starts to brown, about 3 minutes. Add chopped onion and cook, stirring frequently, until onion is translucent, about 3 minutes. Transfer chorizo-onion mixture to a plate. Pour oil into pan and heat over medium-high heat. Add frozen hash brown potatoes and seasoning salt. Stir to coat potatoes in the oil. Let the potatoes brown on one side, then flip once after about 5 minutes. Both sides should be browned and crispy, about 5 minutes per side. Add the diced tomatoes and the chorizo and onion mixture; stir gently to mix evenly. Cook for 4 more minutes, stirring once to rotate the ingredients from the bottom of the pan to the top for even cooking. Serve topped with cilantro and cubed avocados.
Blend banana, almond milk, ice cubes, cinnamon, and vanilla extract together in a blender on medium speed until frothy and smooth, about 1 minute.
Combine buttermilk, flour, sugar, farina, oil, egg, vanilla extract, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a bowl. Beat using an electric mixer on low until just combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-low heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until middle is set, about 4 minutes. Flip and cook until golden brown on the other side, 3 to 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Spread potato nuggets onto a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until nuggets are half-cooked, 10 to 12 minutes. Allow to cool until easily handled. Cut each nugget in half. Reduce oven temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray 12 muffin cups with cooking spray. Heat a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir mushrooms, onion, red bell pepper, spinach, green onions, and sun-dried tomatoes for 5 minutes. Drain excess liquid and stir in chopped bacon. Beat eggs, cream, salt, garlic powder, onion powder, and pepper together in a large bowl. Spoon bacon mixture into the prepared muffin cups and top each with Monterey Jack cheese. Pour egg mixture over cheese layer until each cup is nearly full. Place 4 potato nugget halves into each. Bake in the preheated oven until set in the middle, 20 to 25 minutes.
Preheat a griddle to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C) or place a non-stick skillet over medium-low heat. Stir ricotta cheese, milk, and egg yolks together in a bowl until combined. Whisk flour, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl; stir in ricotta mixture. Whisk egg whites in a bowl until frothy; fold into ricotta mixture. Oil preheated griddle with about 1 teaspoon canola oil; pour 1/4 cup batter onto hot griddle for each pancake. Cook until evenly golden brown, 1 to 2 minutes; turn and cook until evenly golden on other side, 1 to 2 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter, oiling griddle between batches.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Spray 8x8-inch glass baking dish with cooking spray; set aside. Combine Egg Beaters(R), milk and garlic salt in large bowl. Add sausage, potatoes, bell pepper and cheese; stir to combine. Place mixture in dish. Bake 45 minutes or until knife inserted in center comes out clean. Cool slightly before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Combine flour, baking soda, cinnamon, nutmeg, ginger, and salt together in a bowl. Beat butter, white sugar, and brown sugar together in a bowl using an electric mixer until smooth and creamy. Stir bananas, eggs, lemon juice, and vanilla extract into creamed butter mixture until well blended. Stir banana mixture into flour mixture until batter is just combined; pour into the prepared pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of the loaf comes out clean, 60 to 65 minutes. Cool bread in the pan for 10 minutes before turning onto a wire rack to cool completely.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Spray 24 muffin cups with cooking spray. Beat eggs in a large bowl. Add egg whites to eggs and beat until smooth. Stir turkey ham, spinach, red bell peppers, green bell peppers, jalapeno peppers, garlic, Italian seasoning, onion powder, cayenne pepper, salt, and black pepper into the eggs. Ladle the egg mixture into prepared muffin cups to about 3/4-full. Bake in preheated oven until firm in the middle, 25 to 30 minutes.
Heat a skillet over medium heat and spray with cooking spray. Whisk egg whites with salt and pepper in a bowl. Pour egg mixture into the heated skillet and swirl until eggs cover entire bottom of skillet; cook for 1 to 2 minutes. Arrange spinach, tomatoes, and feta cheese in the middle of the eggs. Cook until edges of eggs begin to curl up, 2 to 3 more minutes. Loosen omelet from the skillet using a spatula and fold in half; continue cooking until cheese is melted, 2 to 3 more minutes.
Heat a skillet over medium heat, and coat with cooking spray. Add the cooked rice, 2 tablespoons ketchup, ham, and cheese, if using. Cook and stir until the ingredients are well combined and heated through, about 8 minutes. Scoop the mixture onto a serving bowl and shape into an oval. In a bowl, beat eggs and salt and pepper. Heat a small skillet coated with cooking spray over medium heat. Add egg mixture; cook over medium heat. As eggs set, lift edges, letting uncooked portion flow underneath. Use a spatula to gently fold the eggs into a cocoon shape. When eggs are completely set, remove from the heat. Place the omelet on top of the rice and run a knife length-wise through the top layer of the omelet. It should open like a butterfly and drape over the rice. Top with the final tablespoon of ketchup and a sprinkle of parsley.
Whisk together the sweet potato, eggs, cinnamon, and nutmeg until smooth. Dip the bread into the egg mixture on both sides for several seconds until the bread is moist all the way through. Heat a large, lightly-oiled skillet over medium heat. Cook the French toast in batches until golden brown on each side and no longer wet in the center, about 4 minutes per side.
Place bacon and olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Cook until bacon is nearly crisp, 5 to 7 minutes. Add peppers; cook and stir over medium heat until softened, about 3 minutes. Remove from heat and drain excess grease from the pan. Season with salt, black pepper, and red pepper flakes; stir to combine. Return pan to medium heat, add potatoes and stir until warmed through, about 2 minutes. Pour in eggs and slowly stir to form large, soft curds, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle feta cheese over the top and stir gently to incorporate. Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Place pan under the preheated broiler and cook until the top is set and feta cheese is browned, about 5 minutes.
Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Heat brown sugar, butter, and corn syrup in a saucepan over medium heat until thickened, about 5 minutes. Pour mixture into prepared baking dish and sprinkle with pecans. Arrange apple slices over pecans. Layer bread slices over apple in two layers. Whisk eggs, milk, vanilla extract, almond extract, and salt in a bowl; pour over bread and allow to set for 1 hour at room temperature or cover and refrigerate overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Uncover and bake in preheated oven until fluffy and golden brown, 40 to 45 minutes.
Cut a pocket in each slice of bread. Open carefully In a large bowl, combine the ricotta, cottage cheese and cream cheese. Add the sugar and flavoring extract and beat until smooth. Spread the mixture evenly into each bread pocket. Beat together the egg substitutes and milk. Dip the slices of bread in the egg mixture. Heat a nonstick pan over medium-high heat. Coat with cooking spray. Cook the toast on each side for about 3 to 4 minutes per side until golden brown.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C).  Grease and flour two 9 x 5 inch loaf pans. Mix the flour, salt, sugar, and soda in a mixing bowl.  Add vanilla, milk, eggs, and oil.  Beat for five minutes with an electric mixer.   Stir in the poppy seeds.  Pour batter into loaf pans. Bake for one hour.  Cool on wire racks.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease one 9x5 inch loaf pan. In a small saucepan, combine the raisins and the rum. Cook over medium heat until simmering, then remove from the heat and allow to cool 10 minutes. In a large bowl,  mix together the mashed bananas, brown sugar, canola oil, and eggs with an electric mixer for 1 minute. Sift together the all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, and ground cardamom; stir into the egg mixture with a spoon until well blended, Stir in the walnuts and the rum soaked raisins last. Pour the batter into the prepared pan. Bake in the preheated oven for 50 to 60 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted comes out clean. Allow bread to cool slightly before removing from the pan.
Color the 5 eggs with egg dye. In a large mixing bowl, blend the white sugar, salt, and yeast well with 1 cup of the flour. In a saucepan, combine 2/3 cup milk and butter, heating slowly until liquid is warm and butter is melted. Pour the milk into the dry ingredients and beat 125 strokes with a wooden spoon. Add eggs and 1/2 cup flour or enough to make a thick batter. Beat vigorously for 2 minutes. Stir in enough flour to make a ball of dough that draws away from the sides of the bowl. Turn out onto a floured board and knead for about 10 minutes, working in additional flour to overcome stickiness. Place the dough in a greased bowl, turning to grease the top. Cover tightly with plastic wrap and put in a warm, draft-free place until doubled in bulk, about 1 hour. Meanwhile, combine the fruit, nuts, and anise seed. Punch down the dough and return it to a lightly floured board. Knead in the fruit mixture, keeping the syrupy pieces dusted with flour until they are worked into the dough. Divide the dough in half. Carefully roll each piece into a 24-inch rope--the fruit and nuts will make this slightly difficult. Loosely twist the two ropes together and form a ring on a greased baking sheet. Pinch the ends together well. Brush the dough with melted shortening. Push aside the twist to make a place for each egg. Push eggs down carefully as far as possible. Cover the bread with wax paper and let rise in a warm, draft-free place until doubled in bulk, about 1 hour. Bake the bread in a preheated 350 degree F (175 degrees C) oven for about 35 minutes or until a toothpick inserted in a twist comes out clean. Place on a wire rack to cool. Once the bread is cool, drizzle the icing on top between the eggs, and decorate with colored sprinkles. To make icing: mix together confectioners' sugar, 1 tablespoon whole milk, and vanilla.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Lightly grease four 9 inch cake pans. In a large bowl, beat together cream, flour, salt and eggs. Pour into prepared pans. Bake in preheated oven until puffed and golden, about 15 to 20 minutes.
Preheat griddle to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a large mixing bowl combine dry ingredients.  In another large mixing bowl combine eggs, oil and almond extract; whisk until combined. Stir in soy milk.  Add wet ingredients to dry ingredients and whisk until combined.  Batter should be slightly thick, adjust liquid if necessary. Pour batter by the 1/4 cup full onto hot griddle.  Cook until edges look dry and bubbles burst. Flip and cook another minute or so until golden brown.  Serve warm.
Beat the eggs, sugar, and salt together in a mixing bowl. Whisk in the milk, followed by the flour; whisk until smooth. Heat oil in a deep-fryer or large saucepan to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Soak the bread slices in the egg mixture until the egg has penetrated through to the center of the bread. Wipe off the excess egg. Cook in the deep-fryer several pieces at a time to avoid overcrowding. Cook until golden brown on both sides and no longer soggy in the center, about 4 minutes. Drain the French toast on a paper towel-lined plate before serving.
Beat the eggs in a mixing bowl. Whisk in the milk, cream, vanilla extract, and nutmeg until evenly blended. Fold in the bread cubes and set aside until the bread soaks up the egg mixture, about 5 minutes. Place the sliced apples into a mixing bowl and sprinkle with brown sugar, cinnamon, and melted butter; toss to evenly coat. Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish and arrange the apple slices evenly into the bottom of the prepared baking dish; spoon the bread mixture over top. Cover the dish with aluminum foil and refrigerate overnight. Preheat an oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Sprinkle the diced apple over the bread pudding and cover again with the aluminum foil. Bake in the preheated oven until the bread is no longer soggy, about 40 minutes. Remove the foil and set the oven to Broil; broil until golden brown on top, about 5 minutes. Remove and let stand 5 to 10 minutes before serving.
Whisk together the buttermilk and eggs in a bowl until evenly blended; set aside. Stir together the flour, baking powder, and salt in a separate large bowl. Make a well in the center of the dry ingredients and stir in the buttermilk mixture and mashed bananas, being careful not to over mix the batter (the batter will be lumpy). Let the batter sit for at least 1 minute before using. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat, and coat with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 cupfuls of batter onto the skillet, and cook until bubbles appear on the surface. Flip with a spatula, and cook until browned on the other side.
Bring the red wine, orange juice, and orange zest to a boil in a small saucepan; reduce heat to medium-low and cook for 5 minutes. Pour in the maple syrup and crushed red pepper flakes. Continue cooking 5 minutes more; reduce heat to warm and keep the syrup hot. Meanwhile, spread one side of each slice of bread with the softened cream cheese. Press the blueberries into the cream cheese and sandwich two pieces of bread together with the cream cheese on the inside to form the sandwiches; set aside. Beat the eggs in a mixing bowl; whisk in the milk until smooth. Melt the butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Dip the sandwiches into the egg mixture allowing the egg to soak into the bread; allow excess egg to drip off. Cook the sandwiches in the hot butter until golden brown on both sides and the bread is no longer soggy, about 5 minutes per side. Serve with the hot orange maple syrup.
Whisk together eggs, milk, sugar, and salt until smooth. Whisk in flour until incorporated, then set mixture aside and let stand for 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 500 degrees F (260 degrees C). Place butter into a 9x13 inch glass baking dish, and place into the preheated oven until it melts, then brush it all over the insides of the hot dish. Pour batter into hot baking dish and bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes. Sprinkle with lemon juice, top with berries, and dust with confectioner's sugar; serve immediately with whipped cream.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Line a large baking sheet with parchment paper. In a large bowl, mix the oats, almonds, wheat germ, sunflower seeds, flax seeds, cinnamon, nutmeg, canola oil, and honey. Spread evenly over the prepared baking sheet, pressing down lightly with the back of a spoon. Bake 20 minutes in the preheated oven, or until lightly browned. Allow to cool completely. In a large bowl, break the cooled granola into large chunks. Mix in the raisins, pineapple, sweetened dried cranberries, and papaya. Store in an airtight container.
Prick yams with a fork, and place on a plate. Cook in the microwave for 8 to 10 minutes, turning once, until tender. Cool, peel and dice. Combine the yams, yogurt, milk, ice cubes, sugar and banana in the container of a blender. Blend until smooth.
In a medium bowl, stir together the flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt. Set aside. Place the butter and chocolate chips into a microwave-safe bowl. Cook on High power for 1 minute, then stir. Continue to cook for 15 seconds at a time, stirring each time until chocolate is melted and smooth. Set aside to cool slightly. When the chocolate mixture is fairly cool, stir in the milk, egg whites, and vanilla. Pour this into the dry ingredients, and mix just until blended. Preheat the waffle iron, and coat with cooking spray. Spoon waffle batter onto the hot iron in desired amounts. Close, and cook until the iron stops steaming, and waffles are easy to remove. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 375 F. Separate crescent rolls into sixteen triangles. Place in two ungreased 12 inch rimmed pizza pans with points toward the center. In each pan, press rolls together, seal perforations and form a circle 1 inch larger in diameter than bottom of pan. Turn edges under to make a slight rim. Sprinkle cooked sausage evenly over each crust. Top with potatoes; add peppers and/or green onions, if desired. Sprinkle with Cheddar cheese. Combine eggs, milk, salt and pepper in small bowl: stir well. Pour half of the egg mixture evenly over each pizza. Sprinkle with Parmesan. Bake for 15-20 minutes or until eggs are set and crusts are golden.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Stir in onion, and cook 5 minutes, until tender. Stir in garlic, green bell pepper, and tomatoes. Season with salt, pepper, and cumin. Reduce heat, and simmer 15 to 20 minutes. Mix beans into the onion mixture. Stirring occasionally, cook 10 minutes. Toss in parsley, and transfer to a medium baking dish. Break eggs over the top, dot with butter, and season with salt and pepper. Bake 15 to 20 minutes in the preheated oven, until the eggs are cooked through.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). In a medium bowl, mix vegetable oil, egg, brown sugar, quick cooking oats, whole wheat flour, buttermilk, baking powder, salt and baking soda. Place apples and sausage in a medium baking dish or cast iron skillet. Pour the batter mixture over the apples and sausage. Bake 20 to 25 minutes in the preheated oven, until crisp and golden brown.
Combine ham and pineapple in skillet.  Saute over medium heat until most of the pineapple juice has cooked off.  Separate mixture into 5 sections in skillet and place one slice of cheese on top of each; cook until cheese melts. Serve on top of warm croissants.
Lay the bacon slices in a single layer in a large skillet. Fry over medium heat until it begins to get tinged with brown. Fry on both sides. Remove from pan, but save grease. Melt butter in skillet. Crack eggs into pan, being careful not to break yolks. Place tomato slices, mushrooms, and bread in pan. Fry gently, stirring mushrooms and tomatoes occasionally. Keep everything separate. Turn bread over to brown on both sides. When egg whites are set, but yolks are still runny, dish half of everything onto each of 2 warmed plates, and serve immediately.
In a large bowl, combine eggs, sugar, milk, brandy and orange zest. Beat until thick and foamy. Pour mixture into a shallow pan. Soak bread slices in the mixture for 1 to 2 minutes on each side until they are thoroughly soaked through. Heat a griddle or frying pan over medium heat. Lightly spray griddle with cooking spray. Cook the bread slices 1 to 2 minutes on each side, until golden brown. Serve hot.
In a blender combine milk, frozen bananas, pineapple and honey. Blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake sweet potato in the preheated oven until tender and cooked through, about 1 hour. Remove peel from cooked sweet potato and cool in the refrigerator 8 hours or overnight. Blend sweet potato, banana, soy milk, and cinnamon together in a blender until smooth.
Press carrots and oranges through a juicer and into a large glass.
Bring the quinoa and water to a boil in a saucepan over high heat. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until the quinoa is tender and the water has been absorbed, about 15 to 20 minutes. Melt the butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Add the apple, and sprinkle with salt, cinnamon, and maple syrup. Stir in the almonds; cook and stir until the apple is hot and beginning to soften, 2 to 3 minutes. Pour in the almond milk and half-and-half cream; continue cooking until hot. Stir in the hot quinoa, and cook a few minutes before serving.
Stir together the peanut butter and honey in a bowl until smooth. Mix in the coconut and granola. Divide the mixture in half, and spread half over each tortilla. Place a banana half in the center of a tortilla, and roll up. Slice the rolls in half to serve.
Blend ice cubes, raspberries, orange juice, banana, yogurt, and honey in a blender until smooth.
Preheat a griddle or large skillet over medium heat. Blend oatmeal, protein powder, brown sugar, cinnamon, and baking powder in a blender until fine; dump into a large bowl. Blend banana, eggs, cottage cheese, and vanilla extract in a blender until smooth; pour into bowl with dry ingredients and mix into a thick batter. Stir water into the batter to thin slightly, as desired. Ladle between 1/4 to 1/2 cup batter per pancake onto the preheated cooking surface. Cook until browned on the bottom, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip pancakes and continue cooking until browned on the other side and the center is set, 3 to 5 minutes more.
Whisk pumpkin pie filling and eggs together in a bowl until smooth. Add milk, flour, baking powder, sugar, pumpkin pie spice, cinnamon, and nutmeg; whisk until batter is smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Heat oven to 350 degrees F. Spray 8-inch square oven-safe baking dish with cooking spray. In large bowl, combine oats and granulated sugar. In medium bowl, combine milk, egg substitute and vanilla; mix well. Add to oat mixture; mix well. Pour into prepared baking dish. Bake 40 to 45 minutes or until center jiggles slightly. Remove from oven to cooling rack. Sprinkle brown sugar evenly over top of oatmeal. Using back of spoon, gently spread sugar into a thin layer across entire surface of oatmeal. Return to oven; bake just until sugar melts, about 2 to 3 minutes. Set oven to broil. Broil 3 inches from heat until sugar bubbles and browns slightly, 1 to 2 minutes. (Watch carefully to prevent burning. It may be necessary to turn baking dish.) Spoon into bowls to serve.
Mix flour, 1 1/2 cup water, and sourdough starter together in a large bowl to make batter. Cover loosely with plastic wrap and let sit in a warm place until filled with large holes and bubbles, 4 hours to overnight. Stir oil, eggs, sugar, and salt into the batter; mix well to combine. Whisk 1 tablespoon water and baking soda together in a small bowl until dissolved. Fold into the batter with a rubber spatula. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Pour batter onto preheated iron and bake until crisp and golden, according to manufacturer's instructions, about 3 minutes.
Whisk eggs, salt, and pepper together in a bowl until frothy. Melt 2 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over medium-low heat. Pour eggs into skillet; cook and stir with spatula until set, 3 to 6 minutes. Remove from heat.
                                    Watch Now Cut rolls in half horizontally; lay bottoms in a single layer in a 9x13-inch baking dish. Add a layer of provolone cheese, then scrambled eggs, then a layer of ham, then provolone cheese, then ham, then provolone cheese again. Cover with roll tops. Cut through ham and provolone cheese layers to make individual sandwiches.
                                    Watch Now Melt 1/4 cup butter, brown sugar, and mustard together in a small saucepan over medium heat; cook and stir until sugar is dissolved. Spread mixture over roll tops. Cover baking dish with aluminum foil and let stand, about 30 minutes.
                                    Watch Now Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove aluminum foil from baking dish.
                                    Watch Now Bake in preheated oven until tops are golden brown and cheese has melted, 15 to 20 minutes.
                                    Watch Now
Whisk yogurt in a bowl until smooth creamy; add egg and whisk to combine. Whisk flour and baking soda together in a bowl; add to yogurt mixture and stir until smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Melt 1 tablespoon I Can't Believe It's Not Butter!(R) Spread in medium nonstick skillet over medium-high heat and cook vegetables and bacon, stirring occasionally, until vegetables are tender and bacon is crisp, about 4 minutes. Meanwhile, combine eggs and water in small bowl with wire whisk. Add eggs into skillet and stir until eggs are set. Remove egg and vegetable mixture from skillet and evenly divide between tortillas. Top with cheese; then roll. To seal and toast burritos, wipe skillet with paper towels and melt remaining 1/2 tablespoon Spread over medium heat. Arrange burritos, seam-side-down and cook, turning once, until golden brown, about 2 minutes.
Stir milk, orange juice, and orange zest together in a bowl. Mix flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a separate large bowl. Whisk egg, butter, and vanilla extract into the orange juice mixture. Whisk orange juice mixture into flour mixture until smooth batter forms. Heat a lightly oiled skillet over medium-high heat. Drop batter in 1/4-cup spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Put bananas into a blender with 1 cup water; puree and pour into a slow cooker. Add remaining water, oats, raisins, cinnamon, and vanilla extract. Cook on Medium, stirring every 30 minutes, for 3 hours.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease 24 mini-muffin cups. Beat cream cheese and butter until well combined. Add flour; mix until a dough forms. Divide dough into 24 balls and refrigerate. Whisk eggs and milk together in a bowl. Stir Monterey Jack cheese, chorizo sausage, green chiles, red onion, cilantro, garlic powder, black pepper, ground cumin, cayenne pepper, and salt into the egg mixture. Place one dough ball into each prepared muffin cup; press dough gently into the base and sides to form a dough cup. Spoon egg mixture to fill each dough cup. Bake in preheated oven until center of quiche is set, 25 minutes.
Spoon pumpkin puree into a resealable bag and freeze, 8 hours to overnight. Remove pumpkin from freezer and allow to soften at room temperature, 5 to 10 minutes. Pour milk into the blender; add pumpkin, banana, brown sugar, cinnamon, and vanilla extract. Blend until smooth, about 3 minutes.
Spray a 9x13-inch casserole dish with cooking spray. Mix brown sugar, butter, and 1 teaspoon cinnamon in the bottom of the prepared casserole dish. Add apples, cranberries, and pecans; toss to coat. Evenly spread apple mixture to cover bottom of dish. Arrange bread slices atop apple mixture, overlapping slightly until apple layer is completely covered. Whisk egg substitute, skim milk, vanilla extract, and 2 teaspoons cinnamon in a bowl; evenly pour over bread slices. Cover dish with aluminum foil and refrigerate 4 to 24 hours. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake the covered casserole dish in the preheated oven for 40 minutes. Remove aluminum foil and continue baking until lightly browned and egg mixture is set, about 5 more minutes. Let cool 5 minutes before serving.
Preheat an oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan, or line a muffin pan with cupcake liners. In a mixing bowl, beat the butter and sugar with an electric mixer until light and fluffy. Beat in the eggs one at a time, followed by the bananas. Mix in the self-rising flour and flax seed meal until just incorporated; fold in the walnuts. Pour batter into the prepared pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 20 minutes for muffins, or 1 hour for a loaf. Cool in the pan for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Spread the French bread cubes and cream cheese cubes evenly in a 9x13-inch baking dish. Whisk eggs, milk, maple syrup, and cinnamon together in a bowl; pour mixture over bread and cream cheese. Cover and refrigerate overnight. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake in preheated oven until golden brown, about 45 minutes.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat and stir in the sausage. Cook and stir until the sausage is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink, about 5 minutes. Drain and discard any excess grease. Stir in the hash brown potatoes, cooking and stirring until potatoes are browned, about 5 minutes more. Line the bottom of the prepared baking dish with a layer of buttermilk biscuits, splitting the biscuits in half to completely cover the dish. Spread the sausage and hash brown mixture evenly over the biscuits, and sprinkle the Mexican cheese on top. Whisk together the eggs and milk in a bowl, and pour over the cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until the eggs set, about 25 minutes.
Blend the strawberries and bananas together in a blender until pureed. Add the honey and wheat germ to the puree; blend until combined. Pour the milk into the mixture and blend to integrate. Finally, add the ice and blend until no large chunks of ice remain. Pour into tall glasses to serve.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat, and cook and stir the onion and garlic until onion is translucent, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat. In a bowl, beat the eggs with the milk until frothy and thoroughly blended. Place the torn pieces of croissant bottom into a 9x13-inch nonstick baking dish in an even layer. Top the croissant pieces with the cooked onions and garlic in a layer, followed by layers of green onions, smoked salmon, Monterey Jack cheese, Swiss cheese, mozzarella cheese, and dill. Pour the egg mixture evenly over the casserole, and sprinkle with salt and black pepper. Arrange the tops of the croissants over the casserole, pressing them down into the egg mixture to moisten. Bake the casserole in the preheated oven until the croissant tops are browned and the eggs are set, about 50 minutes. Serve hot.
Beat the eggs in a bowl with the sour cream until blended, and stir in the Cheddar cheese. Spray a skillet with cooking spray, and cook and stir the onion and pesto sauce over medium heat until the onion is translucent, about 6 minutes. Stir in the tomatoes, and pour the egg mixture into the skillet. Cook and stir the egg mixture until the eggs are cooked but not dry, about 3 minutes. Remove eggs from the skillet, and set aside. Place the turkey bacon into the skillet, and fry, flipping once, until the bacon is thoroughly cooked and starting to crisp, about 3 minutes per side. When the bacon is cooked, place the artichokes into the skillet to heat for about 1 minute, and remove the bacon and artichokes from the pan. Spray the skillet with cooking spray, and place the tortilla into the hot skillet. Heat the tortilla until warm and flexible, and remove to a plate. Spoon the eggs, turkey bacon, and artichokes into the center of the tortilla, and season with salt and pepper. Fold the bottom 2 inches of the tortilla up to enclose the filling, and wrap tightly.
In a bowl, combine whole wheat pastry flour, multigrain hot cereal, and baking powder. In a second bowl, beat eggs and combine with milk, pumpkin, yogurt, vanilla extract, sugar and salt.  Add wet ingredients to dry, being careful not to overmix the batter.  Fold in pecans. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium-high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Bubbles will start to form in the pancakes. Cook until the edges of the pancakes start to look dry, and a bubble popped near the edge holds its shape. Flip the pancakes over, and continue cooking until the other side is golden brown. Repeat with remaining batter, adding more oil to the griddle if necessary. Stack the pancakes on a plate and keep warm until serving. For larger batches, keep pancakes warm in a single layer on a cooling rack positioned over a baking sheet in a 300 degrees F oven (150 degrees C).
Combine flour, wheat germ, baking powder, and salt in a large bowl. Set bowl aside. In a separate bowl, whisk together the skim milk, melted margarine, eggs, and sugar. Make a well in the center of the dry ingredients; stir in the wet ingredients, being careful not to over mix the batter. Gently fold in the chocolate chips. Heat a large skillet over medium heat, and coat with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 cupfuls of batter onto the skillet, and cook until bubbles appear on the surface. Flip with a spatula, and cook until golden brown on the other side.
Stir together the potato flakes, pancake mix, onion, Cheddar cheese, milk, egg, olive oil, garlic powder, salt, pepper, and cayenne pepper in a bowl until well combined. Grease a griddle or large skillet, and place over medium heat. Drop pancakes, 1/4 cup at a time, onto the hot griddle, and cook until the edges look dry and 1 bubble appears in the center, about 3 minutes. Flip the pancakes, and cook until browned on the other side, about 3 more minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 9-inch pie plate with cooking spray and coat with bread crumbs. Mix eggs, zucchini, biscuit mix, onion, Cheddar cheese, vegetable oil, parsley, Parmesan cheese, garlic, oregano, salt, and black pepper in a large bowl until well blended. Pour mixture into prepared baking dish. Bake in preheated oven until golden brown and eggs are set, 45 minutes to 1 hour. Allow quiche to cool for 10 minutes before serving.
Heat deep-fryer to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). In a large bowl combine eggs, milk, sugar, cinnamon and vanilla; beat well. Place cornflakes in a separate bowl. Dip bread slices in egg mixture and press into cornflakes. Carefully slide coated bread slices into hot oil. Fry on each side until golden brown. Drain on paper towels and serve hot.
Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Line a large pie pan or quiche pan with the pie shell. Brush shell with melted butter. Sprinkle bacon in bottom of pie pan. Beat eggs with cream, salt, sugar, nutmeg, cayenne pepper and black pepper. Sprinkle the grated cheese over the bacon and then sprinkle the crab meat and shrimp over the cheese. Pour the egg mixture over everything and arrange the mushroom slices over the egg mixture. Bake in preheated oven for 10 minutes, reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and continue baking until set, about 25 to 30 minutes. Let cool for 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease two 9x5 inch loaf pans. In a large bowl, combine flour, salt, cinnamon, baking powder and white sugar. In a separate bowl, beat together eggs and oil. Stir egg mixture into dry ingredients until just moistened. Fold in strawberries and walnuts. Spoon batter into prepared loaf pans. Bake in preheated oven for 1 hour, or until a toothpick inserted into the center of the loaf comes out clean. Let cool 10 minutes in pans and then move to a wire rack to cool completely.
In a medium bowl, whisk eggs gently while slowly pouring in the chicken stock, sake, and soy sauce. Divide the mushroom and chicken evenly between two small tea cups. Pour the egg mixture into each cup until filled. Bring about 1 inch of water to a boil in a steamer or saucepan. Reduce heat to a simmer, and place cups into the steamer. Cover, and steam for 12 minutes, or until egg is firm but soft and silky like tofu. Garnish each cup with a sprig of parsley, and serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Melt the butter in a skillet over medium heat. Stir in the carrots and cashews, and cook until carrots are tender and cashews are golden brown. Mix in the honey. In a bowl, beat together the eggs, heavy cream, nutmeg, and salt. Evenly spread the cheese in the bottom of the pie crust. Layer the carrot mixture over the cheese, and top with the egg mixture. Bake 40 minutes in the preheated oven, until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean.
Combine the yogurt, pumpkin pie filling, banana, apple juice, cinnamon, and nutmeg in a blender. Blend until smooth, about 1 minute. Pour into glasses and serve.
Place the milk, butter, bananas, flour, sugar, salt, cinnamon, and yeast in the bread machine in the order recommended by the manufacturer. Select Basic setting; press Start.  If your machine has a Fruit/Nut setting, add the raisins and walnuts at the signal, or around 5 minutes before the kneading cycle has finished.
Melt the butter over medium heat in a large skillet. Add the onion and bell pepper; cook and stir until the onion is transparent, 5 to 7 minutes. Stir in the mushrooms and bacon, and cook 2 minutes more. Remove skillet from heat, and place the vegetable-bacon mixture in a bowl. Pour the eggs into the same skillet. Cook and stir gently just until the eggs are soft. Stir the vegetable-bacon mixture into the eggs. Season with salt and pepper. Cook the eggs until firm. Remove skillet from heat and stir in the tomato and cheese. If desired, stir in the ketchup.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Toss the rolled oats, spelt flour, brown sugar, cinnamon, ginger, canola oil, applesauce, maple syrup, dried apricots, pecans and ground flax seed together in a bowl, and mix well. Spread the granola mixture on the lined baking sheet. Bake for 20 minutes, stir the granola, then bake for another 15 minutes until dry. Cool completely before serving.
Melt 3 tablespoons of butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Add the apples; cook and stir until tender, 7 to 8 minutes. Stir in the brown sugar, 1 teaspoon of cinnamon and pecans and continue to cook for 1 to 2 minutes longer. Remove from the heat and set aside. Preheat the oven's broiler. Cut the slices of bread in half if they are very large and toast lightly. Spread the remaining butter on to one side of each piece of bread. Place two slices of brie cheese onto the unbuttered side of each piece of bread. Top with a generous scoop of the apple mixture. Place the open face sandwiches onto a baking sheet. Broil until the cheese has melted, about 1 minute. Sprinkle with additional cinnamon if desired.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a medium bowl, whip egg whites with an electric mixer until foamy. Sprinkle in 3 tablespoons of sugar while continuing to whip until stiff peaks form. In a separate bowl, stir together the flour, baking powder, and salt. Mix in the milk, egg yolks, and lemon juice until well blended, then fold in the egg whites using a rubber spatula or wooden spoon. Melt the butter in a large cast-iron (or other oven proof) skillet over medium heat. Spread the batter evenly in the pan. Layer the thinly sliced apple over the batter, and sprinkle with cinnamon and remaining sugar. Place the skillet in the oven, and bake for 10 minutes, or until the apples are golden brown and glazed looking. Cut into wedges to serve.
Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. In a shallow bowl, beat together eggs and milk. Dip bread slices one at a time in egg mixture, and fry in butter until golden. After turning once, top with a slice of muenster cheese, and cover until cheese is melted.
Preheat a lightly greased waffle iron. In a large bowl, mix flour, cornstarch, baking powder, and salt. In a medium bowl, beat together egg yolks, milk, vanilla, and vegetable oil. Blend into the flour mixture to form a batter. In a medium bowl, whip egg whites with sugar until soft peaks form. Fold into the batter. Spray waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray, or lightly brush with oil. Ladle the batter onto preheated waffle iron. Cook the waffles until golden and crisp. Serve immediately.
Heat a non-stick skillet over medium heat. Pour in eggs, then Spam. Cook, stirring, until eggs are nearly done, then sprinkle cheese over, and stir until melted.
Preheat waffle iron. In a large mixing bowl, sift together flour, baking powder, sugar and baking soda. In a separate bowl, beat together egg yolks and milk.  Add milk mixture, butter and oil to flour; stir gently to combine. Beat egg whites until stiff peaks have formed; fold into batter. Spray preheated waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray. Pour mix onto hot waffle iron and sprinkle generously with chopped pecans. Cook until golden brown. Keep warm in oven while remaining waffles cook.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Make the salsa: In a blender or food processor puree tomatillos, garlic, onions, cilantro, water, jalapeno pepper and salt.  In a saucepan, bring the salsa to a simmer. Simmer for 5 minutes. Transfer the salsa into a bowl and set the bowl aside. Make the filling: Put the chopped tomatoes into a sieve, and let them drain for 10 minutes or more. In a large skillet, heat the oil over medium heat. Add the bell peppers, and saute them until they are soft, about 5 to 10 minutes. Add the eggs, and turn the heat to low. Stirring occasionally with a wooden spoon, let the eggs cook until they begin to set. Take the skillet off the heat and sprinkle in the salt, pepper, 1 cup Monterey Jack cheese and the drained tomatoes; stir gently. Lay a flour tortilla on a work surface. Spread about 2/3 cup of the egg filling down the middle of the tortilla. Drop 1 tablespoon of the sour cream on top of the eggs. Fold in the sides of the tortilla to partly cover the egg mixture, then roll the tortilla, folding in the outer edges as you roll, to enclose the egg mixture completely. Continue this process with the remaining filling and the tortillas. Place the filled tortillas close together in a 10x16 inch casserole dish. At this point you can cover the dish and chill it for up to 24 hours. Pour the salsa over the filled tortillas, and sprinkle them with the 1/2 cup grated cheese. Cover the dish with foil, and bake the casserole for 15 minutes (25 minutes if it has been chilled). Serve hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch pie plate. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat and stir in sausage. Cook and stir until sausage is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink, about 10 minutes. Drain and discard any excess grease. Place four tortillas in prepared pie plate, overlapping and extending 1/2-inch beyond rim; place remaining tortilla in center. Layer sausage, Monterey Jack cheese, Cheddar cheese, and green chilies over tortillas. Combine eggs, heavy whipping cream, ricotta cheese, and chili powder in a bowl; slowly pour egg mixture into pie plate. Bake in preheated oven until center is set and puffed, about 45 minutes. Sprinkle with cilantro and cut into wedges.
Cook and stir bacon in a large saucepan over medium-high heat until bacon starts to brown, about 10 minutes; drain grease, retaining 1/4 of the drippings. Stir onions into bacon and drippings; cook and stir until soft, about 10 minutes. Stir in brown sugar; cook until onions are sticky and browned, about 5 more minutes. Mix in garlic, cayenne pepper, cinnamon, and nutmeg. Cook and stir until garlic is soft, about 5 minutes. Mix in bourbon whiskey, coffee, sherry vinegar, and maple syrup. Bring to a boil, reduce heat to low, and cook until the bacon jam is thickened but not completely dry, stirring occasionally to prevent burning, about 35 minutes. Mix in ketchup and cook 5 more minutes. Remove from heat, let the bacon jam cool, and pulse in a food processor to a slightly chunky, spreadable consistency. Bacon jam will store in the refrigerator, covered, up to 2 weeks.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain on paper towels. When cooled, chop the bacon. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Separate biscuits and pull each biscuit into halves. Press 2 biscuit halves into a muffin cup, molding the dough to the inside to make a dough cup. Repeat with remaining dough to make 12 biscuit cups. Whisk eggs and milk together in a bowl until thoroughly combined. Spoon each biscuit cup about half full of egg mixture and top with about 1 tablespoon bacon and about 1 1/2 teaspoon Cheddar cheese per biscuit. Bake in the preheated oven until the biscuit crust is browned, the cheese is melted and bubbling, and the egg center is set, about 20 minutes.
Bring quinoa, water, milk, cinnamon, and vanilla extract to a boil in a saucepan. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until quinoa is tender and has absorbed the water, 10 to 15 minutes. Remove saucepan from heat. Mix cherries, cashews, and honey into the quinoa mixture; top with blackberries and creme fraiche.
Melt the butter in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Crack eggs into the melted butter and cook to desired firmness, 5 to 7 minutes. Heat 1 tablespoon olive oil in a separate skillet over medium heat; cook the garlic and jalapeno pepper in the hot oil until fragrant, about 2 minutes. Stir the white beans, 2 tablespoons olive oil, oregano, and turmeric into the garlic mixture; cook and stir until the olive oil is mostly absorbed, about 5 minutes. Stir the pesto into the mixture and remove the skillet from the heat; season with salt. Top each slice of rye toast with about half of the bean mixture. Squeeze the lemon wedge over the beans. Place one of the fried eggs atop each portion and sprinkle with Parmesan cheese to serve.
Combine the rice, milk, rice flour, sugar, applesauce, baking powder, and oil together in a bowl; blend with an electric hand mixer for 2 minutes. Grease a large skillet or griddle and place over medium heat. Pour 1/4 cup of the batter onto the griddle; cook until the underside is golden brown. Flip and cook until the other side is also golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes per side.
Heat the port wine over medium heat until just below the simmer point in a large stockpot with a lid. Add bourbon and rum, and bring back to just below simmering. Save the bottles and their caps for storing leftover glogg. While the wine and liquors are heating, place the cardamom, cinnamon stick, cloves, and orange peel onto the center of the square of cheesecloth. Gather together the edges of the cheesecloth, and tie with kitchen twine to secure. When mixture is very hot but not boiling, carefully light it with a long-handled match.  Wearing a heatproof cooking mitt, carefully pour the sugar into the flames, and let the mixture burn for 1 minute.  Put the lid on the stockpot to extinguish the flames, and turn off the heat.  Let the mixture cool, covered, for about 10 minutes; add the cheesecloth bundle of spices and the raisins and almonds to the warm wine mixture and let it cool to room temperature, about 1 hour. Strain the cooled glogg and reserve the raisins and almonds. To store, pour strained glogg into the bottles, recap, and keep upright in a cool dark place for up to 1 year.  Refrigerate the steeped raisins and almonds in a covered bowl or jar for up to 1 year. To serve, pour glogg into a saucepan and warm over low-medium heat until hot but not simmering, about 5 minutes.  Ladle 3 ounces of warmed glogg into a small coffee cup or small Swedish-style glogg mug, and garnish each serving with a few reserved raisins and almonds.
Prepare a skillet with cooking spray and place over medium heat. Put the chopped tomato in the hot skillet; season with garlic salt and pepper. Whisk the egg, water, and Parmesan cheese together in a small bowl; add to the skillet. Reduce heat to medium-low. When the eggs have begun to set at the edges, use spatula or wooden spoon to scrape the eggs from the edge of the pan to the center, forming large soft curds. Continue scraping your spoon along the bottom of the pan to redistribute the eggs as they cook. Cook until the eggs are set but still slightly moist, about 5 minutes.
Heat oven to 350 degrees F. Cook chorizo and onions in medium ovenproof skillet on medium heat 8 min. or until chorizo is done, stirring frequently. Add potatoes and chiles; cook 2 min., stirring occasionally. Remove from heat. Stir in 1/2 cup cheese; spread to form even layer in skillet. Whisk eggs and sour cream until well blended; pour over chorizo mixture. Top with remaining cheese. Bake 25 min. or until center is set. Serve topped with salsa.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly butter an 8x8-inch baking pan. Pour bread cubes into the prepared pan. Beat milk, eggs, sugar, and vanilla extract together in a bowl until evenly mixed; pour mixture over bread cubes. Arrange butter chunks atop bread mixture. Set aside for bread to absorb liquid, about 10 minutes. Sprinkle with cinnamon. Bake in the preheated oven until top is golden, 45 to 50 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 9x5-inch loaf pan with cooking spray. Whisk flour, baking powder, and 1/2 teaspoon salt together in a bowl. Beat 1/2 cup butter and 1 cup brown sugar together in a bowl using an electric mixer until light and fluffy. Add eggs, 1 at a time, beating just until combined. Beat bananas and 1 tablespoon vanilla extract into butter mixture. Gradually add flour mixture, beating on low speed, just until incorporated. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 45 to 55 minutes. Cool in the pan for 20 minutes. Run knife around edges of bread and transfer to a wire rack. Heat 1/4 cup brown sugar and 2 tablespoons butter in a saucepan over medium heat; bring to a boil. Cook, stirring constantly with a whisk, until sugar is dissolved, about 1 minute. Stir cream into brown sugar mixture and remove saucepan from heat. Stir 1/3 cup confectioners' sugar and 1/4 teaspoon salt into cream mixture until glaze is smooth. Drizzle glaze over loaf.
Stir oats, yogurt, and almond milk together in a jar with a lid. Twist lid onto jar and refrigerate, 8 hour to overnight. Stir oatmeal and add banana when ready to eat.
Heat 1 teaspoon coconut oil on a griddle set to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C) or a skillet over medium heat. Place bananas in the bowl of a stand mixer. Add eggs, 3 tablespoons coconut oil, vanilla extract, salt, and baking soda; beat until batter is smooth and fluffy. Gently ladle batter, about 1/4 cup per pancake, onto the hot griddle; sprinkle with cinnamon and arrange walnuts on each pancake. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 3 to 4 more minutes. Repeat with remaining batter, adding more coconut oil between batches.
Combine oats, almond-coconut milk, chia seeds, coconut, cardamom, cinnamon, vanilla extract, ginger, and nutmeg in a bowl. Cover bowl with plastic wrap and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight.
Beat eggs, milk, seasoned salt, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl. Heat olive oil in a large non-stick skillet over medium-high heat; saute jalapeno in hot oil until slightly softened, 2 to 3 minutes. Add ham to jalapeno and cook until heated through, about 1 minute. Pour egg mixture into ham mixture. Cook and stir until eggs are set but not dry, 3 to 5 minutes. Sprinkle 1/2 of the Cheddar cheese over eggs; cook and stir until cheese is melted. Transfer eggs to a plate and sprinkle remaining cheese over the top.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels; crumble into pieces. Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Grease bottom and sides of a 9x13-inch casserole dish. Layer potatoes, red bell pepper, orange bell pepper, onion, and jalapeno pepper in the casserole dish. Sprinkle 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese on top. Scatter bacon pieces over the cheese. Whisk eggs, milk, garlic powder, black pepper, salt, and paprika together in a large bowl. Pour over layers in the casserole dish. Bake in the preheated oven until set, about 35 minutes. Remove from oven and top with remaining 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese. Continue baking until cheese is melted and golden, about 10 minutes more.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Spray the waffle iron with cooking spray. Whisk cream cheese frosting, corn syrup, and water together in a bowl until smooth. Place 1 cinnamon roll dough slice on each section of the preheated waffle iron, close the iron, and cook until waffles are golden and cooked through, 2 to 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining dough. Drizzle waffles with syrup.
Bring a pot of water to a boil; add ramen noodles and cook for 3 minutes. Drain water and stir seasoning packet and parsley into noodles. Heat oil a non-stick skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion until fragrant, about 2 minutes. Add noodles and stir for 2 minutes more. Whisk eggs, water, and salt together in a bowl; pour into same skillet as noodle mixture. Cook and stir eggs until set and cooked through, 2 to 4 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a baking pan with 2 teaspoons coconut oil. Combine almond flour, salt, and baking soda in a bowl. Mix well. Break bananas into pieces and place in a microwave-safe bowl. Microwave until soft, about 30 seconds. Mash until creamy. Add eggs and 1/4 cup coconut oil; mix well. Combine with the almond flour mixture. Drop batter onto the prepared baking pan in biscuit shapes. Bake in the preheated oven until peaks are lightly browned, about 17 minutes. Allow to cool slightly before serving.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Stir milk, zucchini, eggs, and butter in a bowl until evenly blended. Combine flour, oats, baking powder, brown sugar, salt, and cinnamon in another bowl; gradually stir flour mixture into zucchini mixture. Ladle batter into preheated waffle iron. Cook until waffles are golden and crisp, about 5 minutes.
Spray a 9x5-inch glass or microwave-safe loaf pan with cooking spray; sprinkle the onion, green bell pepper, and mushrooms into the pan, and toss lightly with a fork just to mix. Season with salt and black pepper, and pour in the egg whites. Cook in a microwave oven on High setting for 3 minutes. Remove and stir the cooked egg white from the side of the pan into the rest of the ingredients; cook for 3 more minutes on High. If the omelet is still a little runny on top, slice it into chunks and turn them over in the loaf pan; microwave for 30 more seconds on High. Adjust salt and pepper, and serve.
Preheat a non-stick griddle to 375 degrees F (185 degrees C). Lightly grease the cooking surface with butter. Sift the flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together into a mixing bowl. Mix the almond flour and sugar into the flour mixture until just blended. Stir the yogurt, eggs, and butter together in a separate bowl; add to the flour mixture, stirring only until just incorporated. The batter will be thick and airy. Pour about 1/3 cup of the batter onto your preheated cooking surface, leaving space for the pancakes to expand. Cook until dry around the edges and bubbles have formed over the top, 2 to 3 minutes; turn and continue cooking until done in the middle and golden brown, another 1 to 2 minutes.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease a 9 inch round cake pan. Place the bacon in a large, deep skillet; cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until lightly browned but still soft, about 7 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on a paper towel-lined plate.  Place the bacon on the bottom of the greased cake pan, overlapping slices as necessary to fit.  Sprinkle the bacon strips with the brown sugar. Combine the prepared cake batter, maple extract, and maple syrup in a large bowl, mixing well.  Pour the batter over the brown sugar and bacon in the cake pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, 15-20 minutes.  Cool cake slightly and remove from pan by inverting onto a serving platter.  Cut into wedges to serve.
Place the potatoes and onion into a bowl, and stir in eggs, salt, and flour as needed to make the mixture hold together. With wet hands, scoop up about 1/3 cup of the mixture per patty, and form into flat round or oval shapes. Heat the vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat until it shimmers, and gently place the patties into the hot oil. Fry until the bottoms are golden brown and crisp, 5 to 8 minutes, then flip with a spatula and fry the other side until golden. Line a colander or strainer with 2 paper towels, and drain the cooked latkes in the colander. Serve hot.
Peel and coarsely grate the potatoes, squeezing out as much liquid as you can. Transfer the shredded potatoes to a mixing bowl. Stir in the crushed garlic, salt, pepper, marjoram, and caraway seeds. Beat the eggs with the milk. Add the egg mixture to the potatoes and stir well to combine. Gradually mix in the flour to form a thick but still pourable batter. Heat the oil in a skillet over medium-high heat; the oil should be about 1/4-inch deep. Spoon about 1/4 cup of batter into the hot oil, flattening it slightly. Fry the pancake until golden brown, about 3 minutes on each side. Drain on paper towels. Taste the first pancake and adjust the seasoning if necessary; repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 9x5-inch loaf pans. Mix white sugar and applesauce together in a large bowl; stir pumpkin puree and eggs into sugar mixture until smooth. Mix baking powder, baking soda, cinnamon, salt, ginger, cloves, and mace into pumpkin mixture; fold in walnuts and chocolate chips. Stir flour into pumpkin mixture until fully incorporated. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of each loaf comes out clean, 1 hour. Cool in the pans for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack. Sprinkle each loaf with confectioners' sugar.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat and stir in sausage. Cook and stir until sausage is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink, 5 to 7 minutes. Drain and discard any excess grease. Beat eggs, milk, salt and ground mustard in a large bowl. Stir Cheddar cheese and sausage into the egg mixture. Roll out crescent roll dough and place one sheet on the bottom of a large baking dish. Pour egg mixture into baking dish; place the second sheet of crescent roll dough on top. Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate for 8 hours or overnight. Allow casserole to come to room temperature for 30 minutes before baking; remove plastic. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until egg is set and a knife inserted near the center comes out clean, about 40 minutes.
Crepe batter: in a large bowl, mix together eggs, milk, water, flour, sugar, 1 teaspoon butter, and cognac. Filling: beat pudding mix, instant coffee and whipping cream together with an electric mixer until the mixture is thick. Sauce: in a small saucepan, melt the chocolate, butter, evaporated milk, and confectioners' sugar together until the mixture is a little thick. Crepes: heat a small skillet (or crepe pan) to a high temperature. Place a small amount of batter into the skillet and swirl it around until the batter covers the bottom of the pan. When the crepe is slightly browned flip the crepe over and let the other side brown for a few seconds. The first crepe will most likely not turn out well, but the rest will. Stack the crepes on top of each other to let tem cool before filling. Spoon the filling into the center of each crepe and roll the crepe up around it. Spoon the sauce over the crepes and serve.
Place ingredients into the pan of the bread machine in the order recommended by the manufacturer.  Select Fruit Bread setting, and Start. The dates and nuts can be added at the very beginning for better distribution, or added after the beep.
In a blender combine orange juice, pineapple chunks, milk, honey and crushed ice. Blend until smooth.
Cream together butter or margarine, sugar, and salt.  Mix in egg.  Stir in bananas and milk.  Stir in flour and baking soda with a few swift strokes; do not overbeat.  Spread batter into a greased and floured 9 x 5 inch loaf pan. Bake at 325 degrees F (165 degrees C) for 45 to 60 minutes, or until a tester inserted in the center comes out clean.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Line the bottom and sides of a 9x13 inch baking dish with crescent rolls. Cover rolls with sausage, tomatoes, mushrooms, 1 cup Cheddar cheese and 1 cup mozzarella cheese. Bake in preheated oven for 8 to 10 minutes or until crust is golden brown. Remove from oven. In a large bowl, beat together eggs, Worcestershire sauce, salt and pepper. Pour egg mixture over crust. Bake for another 7 to 9 minutes, or until eggs are set. Remove from oven and sprinkle with remaining cheese.
Brown the sausage in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Drain and set aside.  Prepare grits according to package directions using water, not milk. As the grits thicken, stir in the salt and garlic powder. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Transfer the cooked grits to a 9x13 inch baking dish. Mix in the egg and 1 1/2 cups Cheddar cheese. Mix the sausage into the grits, then sprinkle the remaining 1/2 cup of Cheddar cheese over the top. Bake for 30 minutes in the preheated oven, or until the cheese is melted and bubbly.
Combine the venison, bacon, sage, ginger, pepper, and onion salt in a large bowl; mix well.  Shape into 12 patties using about 1/4 cup of  mixture per patty. Patties can either be pan-fried or frozen for later use.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a large bowl, stir together the oats, oat bran, coconut and almonds. Divide between two large baking sheets, and spread into an even layer. Bake for 7 or 8 minutes in the preheated oven, until lightly toasted. Allow to cool for a few minutes, then return to the large bowl. While the oats are toasting, combine the coconut milk, coconut oil, vegetable oil, malt syrup and honey in a saucepan. Cook over medium heat, stirring until it comes to a boil. Boil for 2 minutes. Remove from heat, and stir in the vanilla. Pour the syrup over the granola in the bowl, and stir until the dry ingredients are fully coated. Divide between the two baking sheets, and spread evenly. Bake for 8 minutes in the preheated oven, or until fragrant and toasted. Cool in the pans, then mix in the dried cranberries. Store in an airtight container at room temperature.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat and cook peppers and onion until tender. Transfer to a bowl and mix with feta, sour cream and salt. Spread bottom of pie crust with Monterey Jack cheese. Top cheese with pepper and onion mixture. Mix eggs and milk in a bowl; evenly pour over onion and pepper mixture. Top with Cheddar cheese. Bake 45 minutes in the preheated oven, or until cheese is melted and eggs are firm.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 8x4 inch loaf pans. Sift together the flour, baking soda, baking powder, cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt in a bowl. In another bowl, mash the pumpkin, and stir in the sugar, oil, and eggs. Pour the flour mixture into the pumpkin mixture, and stir lightly to combine. Use a rubber spatula to fold the pecans and chocolate chips into the batter. Gently run the spatula through the center of the bowl, then around the sides of the bowl, repeating until fully incorporated. Fill the prepared loaf pans about 3/4 full, and bake in the preheated oven for 20 to 25 minutes, until the bread has risen, and a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean. Cool in the pans for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Run the carrots and apple through a juice extractor and pour the resulting juice into a glass. Stir in the coconut milk and garnish with freshly grated ginger root.
Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add chopped tomatoes and garlic, stirring occasionally, until liquid has cooked out of the tomatoes. Carefully break eggs over tomatoes without breaking yolks. Lightly season with salt, reduce heat, and cover. Simmer covered for 20 minutes, or until yolks are fully cooked. Adjust seasoning with salt as needed. Serve with pita pockets.
Heat 2 Tbs. oil over low heat in a 12-inch non-stick skillet (so potatoes don't stick). While skillet heats, prepare onion and salmon as directed above. A few minutes before cooking, increase heat to medium-high. When oil starts to send up wisps of smoke, add onion and salmon; cook, stirring often, until golden brown. Meanwhile, dice potatoes and toss with remaining oil. Transfer salmon mixture to a bowl and reserve. Add potatoes to empty skillet; cook, stirring only occasionally so they form a golden-brown crust, about 10 minutes. As potatoes cook, mix ketchup, mustard, fresh dill and 2 Tbs. of water. (Recipe can be prepared to this point up to 2 hours ahead. Spread hot potatoes on a large lipped cookie sheet; cover when cool. Return skillet to medium-high; add potatoes and re-crisp.) Return reserved salmon mixture to skillet; stir in ketchup mixture, then season with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring frequently, until hash has nicely browned, about 5 minutes longer.
Melt butter in a small skillet over medium-high heat. Saute the onion in butter until soft. Mash up the slice of luncheon meat with a fork, and add it to the skillet. Cook for 2 or 3 minutes, until browned. Pour the egg into the skillet so that it covers all of the meat and onion. Cook until firm, then flip to brown the other side. Place the egg and meat onto one slice of the bread and top with cheese and tomato if desired. Place the other piece of bread on top. Bread can also be toasted first.
Place bacon, sausage, and Canadian-style bacon in a medium skillet over medium heat. Fry until evenly brown; drain. Crumble bacon, and chop sausage. Mix eggs into the skillet, and scramble with the bacon and sausage until no longer runny. Place pita bread in a microwave, and heat on High about 30 seconds, until warm. Spoon the egg mixture into the pita bread halves, and serve warm.
In a large bowl, combine baking mix, cheese, Italian-style seasoning, red bell pepper, pepperoni, green onion, tomatoes and green bell pepper. In a separate bowl, stir together pizza sauce, milk, sour cream and eggs. Stir egg mixture into flour/vegetable mixture until all flour is moistened. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Spoon the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1 tablespoon for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly spray two 8x4x2 inch loaf pans with a non-stick cooking spray. Combine the fat free sour cream, egg whites, vanilla, bananas and margarine and mix on medium speed of electric mixer until smooth, creamy and well blended. Sift the flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt and light brown sugar into the banana mixture. Stir with a spoon until combined. Add more flour if necessary until a thick and rather resistant dough is formed. Fold in the optional nuts and raisins. Mix for 1 minute on the low speed of an electric mixer. Divide dough evenly between the two loaf pans. Bake at 375 degrees F (190 degrees C) until golden and the center tests done. Remove breads from pans immediately and allow to cool on a rack before slicing.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9-inch deep dish pie pan. Sprinkle the bacon, cheese, onion and asparagus into pie pan. In a medium bowl, beat together the milk, baking mix, egg substitute, salt, pepper and parsley; beat until smooth. Pour mixture into pie pan. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted into center of quiche comes out clean, about 40 minutes.
To remove excess salt from the fish, bring the fish to a boil in a large pot of water. Drain the water, and repeat the process. Drain the fish, flake, and press liquid out. In a large skillet, saute oil, onions, tomatoes,  and peppers for 2 minutes. Mix in flaked saltfish, lemon juice, and hot pepper. Cook mixture at a low heat until the moisture has almost completely evaporated. Pile the mixture into the center of a serving dish, and arrange lettuce and avocado around it.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Butter the insides of 2 (10-ounce) ramekins and place on a baking sheet. Place bread cubes into a large bowl, set aside. Heat vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir bacon in hot oil until browned and almost crisp, 5 to 6 minutes. Remove excess oil from skillet and discard. Stir in onion and cook for about 2 minutes. Stir in red pepper and cook for an additional minute. Stir in chicken broth and heavy cream; cook until mixture begins to simmer, about 1 to 2 minutes. Pour cream mixture over bread cubes and mix thoroughly until all liquid is absorbed. Stir in 1 egg, lemon juice, tarragon, and lemon zest. Mix in crabmeat, salt, black pepper, and cayenne pepper. Spoon Mixture into prepared ramekins and bake in a preheated oven until tops are golden brown, about 20 minutes. Remove ramekins from oven and top each bread pudding with a poached egg. Spoon hollandaise sauce over each egg. Garnish with cayenne pepper.
Lightly grease or spray a 13 x 9-inch (33 x 23 cm) baking dish. Layer ham, cheese, green onion and asparagus in dish. Whisk milk into baking mix a little at a time so mixture doesn't get lumpy. Whisk in eggs just until blended. Pour mixture carefully over ingredients in baking dish. Bake in a preheated 400 degrees F (200 degrees C) oven until puffed and golden brown, and a knife inserted in centre comes out clean, 35 to 45 minutes. Let cool for 5 minutes before slicing and serving.
Heat oil in a medium skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir ham scraps until browned, about 5 minutes. Remove to a plate, reserving the grease in the pan. Place ham slices in the pan and cook over medium heat until browned, about 5 minutes on each side. Season both sides with salt, black pepper, and cayenne pepper. Remove ham and reserve on a plate. Reduce heat to medium-low and sprinkle flour over the pan drippings. Cook and stir for 2 minutes.  Increase heat to medium-high and pour in coffee into the pan. Cook and stir until combined and thickened. Season to taste. Return ham to the pan to warm through.
Whisk together the brown sugar, white sugar, baking powder, milk, egg, olive oil, and vanilla extract. Stir in the flour 1/2 cup at a time until the batter reaches the desired thickness. The batter should look like cake batter (not too thin, but not too thick). Heat a large skillet over medium heat, and coat with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 cupfuls of batter onto the skillet, and cook until bubbles appear on the surface, about 3 minutes. Flip with a spatula, and cook until browned on the other side.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Place a steamer insert into a saucepan, and fill with water to just below the bottom of the steamer. Cover pan and bring the water to a boil. Place 1 pound of asparagus into the steamer insert, cover, and steam until just tender, 4 to 6 minutes. Drain asparagus and set aside. Beat eggs, half-and-half, parsley, salt, white pepper, and green hot sauce in a bowl until smooth. Stir together cooked chicken, Swiss cheese, Monterey Jack cheese, mushrooms, and green onions in a bowl; mix in flour. Line a 9-inch pie dish with pie crust. Spread about half of the cooked asparagus over the bottom of the crust. Spread about half of the chicken mixture over the asparagus. Repeat layers of asparagus and chicken mixture. Gently pour the egg mixture over the layers. Arrange 3 asparagus spears decoratively on top of the quiche. Bake in the preheated oven until the filling is slightly puffed and lightly browned and a toothpick inserted into the center of the quiche comes out clean, 40 to 50 minutes. Sprinkle quiche with cherry tomatoes, if desired.
Cook bacon in a skillet over medium heat until crisp, 3 to 5 minutes. Transfer to a paper towel-lined plate to drain; let cool and crumble. Reserve bacon drippings in skillet. Combine crumbled bacon, potatoes, flour, eggs, garlic, thyme, salt, and black pepper in a large bowl. Pour vegetable oil about 1/4-inch deep into skillet with bacon drippings and place over medium heat; heat until the oil and bacon drippings shimmer. Gently drop potato mixture by heaping tablespoon into hot oil and flatten potatoes into small patties about 3 inches in diameter. Cook until browned, about 3 minutes on each side.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Combine cream cheese, mayonnaise, grated Parmesan, and oregano. Reserve 1 tablespoon mozzarella cheese. Stir in remaining mozzarella cheese, meatballs, tomatoes and olives until combined. Spoon into 1 1/2 quart baking dish.  Top with reserved mozzarella cheese. Bake uncovered for 25 to 30 minutes. Serve with RITZ Crackers for dipping.
Cook sausage according to package directions; cut into 1/4-inch slices; set aside. In a bowl, combine green onions, red pepper, chilies and cilantro; set aside. Spray the interior of a 5 to 6 quart slow cooker with vegetable cooking spray. Layer one-third of the hash browns, sausage, green onion mixture and cheese into crock. Repeat layers twice. In a bowl, beat the eggs, milk, salt and pepper; pour over layered ingredients. Cover and cook on low for 7 to 8 hours or until thermometer inserted into the center reads 160 degrees F. Serve.
Grease the inside of a slow cooker. Place apple pieces in the prepared slow cooker. Sprinkle brown sugar over apples and top with butter slices. Beat eggs, milk, vanilla extract, and allspice together in a bowl with a whisk until smooth; add raisins. Mix bread pieces into egg mixture until bread is saturated. Pour bread-egg mixture into the slow cooker. Cook on High for 2 hours.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a glass 9x13-inch baking pan. Combine potatoes, cream of chicken soup, Cheddar cheese, sour cream, 1/2 cup melted butter, onion, salt, and pepper together in a bowl; spread into the prepared baking pan. Mix crushed crackers and 1/2 cup melted butter together in a bowl and sprinkle over potato mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until bubbling and browned on top, 60 to 90 minutes.
Heat oven to 350 degrees F. Grease rectangular baking dish, 13x9x2 inches. Layer sausage, mushrooms, onions, tomatoes and cheese in dish. Stir remaining ingredients until blended. Pour over cheese. Bake uncovered 30 to 35 minutes or until golden brown and set.
Combine sausage, eggs, Cheddar-Monterey Jack cheese, bell pepper. onion, and cayenne in a bowl and mix to combine. Preheat the air fryer to 360 degrees F (180 degrees C). Spray a nonstick 6x2-inch cake pan with cooking spray. Place egg mixture in the prepared cake pan. Cook in the air fryer until frittata is set, 18 to 20 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat oil in heavy 10-inch skillet over medium heat. Cook leek with a pinch of salt, stirring occasionally, until leeks soften and start to turn translucent, 5 to 6 minutes. Add jalapeno and zucchini; season with pinch of salt. Cook until zucchini start to get tender and pale green, about 5 minutes. Add asparagus and cook until bright green, about 1 minute. Add spinach and another pinch of salt, cooking until wilted, 1 minute. Stir in cooked potatoes and heat through, about 5 minutes. Crack 12 large eggs into a bowl. Add cayenne, salt, and pepper. Whisk for at least 30 seconds. Pour eggs into over vegetables in skillet over medium heat. Add 3 ounces of crumbled goat cheese; stir lightly until evenly distributed. Top with remaining cheese. Remove from heat. Bake in preheated oven until eggs are set, 12 to 15 minutes. When nearly set, turn on broiler. Broil frittata until top browns, 1 to 2 minutes. Cool slightly; serve warm.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels, reserving 1 tablespoon bacon grease. Crumble bacon into pieces. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch casserole dish with reserved bacon grease. Place milk, eggs, seasoned salt, and black pepper in the bowl of a stand mixer fitted with a paddle attachment. Beat on medium speed until smooth and pale, about 5 minutes. Add bacon pieces, Cheddar cheese, onion, and green bell pepper; beat until combined, about 1 1/2 minutes more. Layer potato slices in the bottom of the casserole dish. Pour egg mixture over potatoes. Arrange sliced mushrooms on top. Cover casserole with aluminum foil. Bake in the preheated oven, about 35 minutes. Remove aluminum foil and bake until eggs are set, about 30 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 475 degrees F (245 degrees C). Place eggs in mixing bowl. Add milk, grated Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese, flour, lemon zest, salt, black pepper, and cayenne pepper. Whisk together until completely combined. Heat 2 teaspoons olive oil in cast-iron skillet over medium heat. Add bacon and cook until fat is rendered out and bacon begins to crisp up. Add asparagus and raise heat to high. Cook and stir about 1 minute. Pour batter into pan in a circular motion. Bake in preheated oven until browned and puffed, 12 to 13 minutes.
Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir mushrooms and garlic until garlic is fragrant, about 1 minute. Add spinach to mushroom mixture and cook until spinach is wilted, 2 to 3 minutes. Stir eggs into mushroom-spinach mixture; season with salt and pepper. Cook, without stirring, until eggs start to firm; flip. Sprinkle cream cheese over egg mixture and cook until cream cheese starts to soften, about 5 minutes.
Put coconut water, banana, avocado, kale, lemon juice, and cayenne pepper in blender; blend until smooth, about 30 seconds.
Blend almond milk, bananas, pumpkin, dates, protein powder, vanilla extract, nutmeg, cinnamon, cloves, and ginger together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Press pie crust pastry into a pie dish.
                                    Watch Now Bake in the preheated oven until lightly golden, 10 to 12 minutes.
                                    Watch Now Arrange salmon into the baked pie crust to cover evenly. Spread cream cheese over over salmon layer using your hands. Sprinkle dill over cream cheese layer.
                                    Watch Now Beat eggs, milk, salt, and pepper together in a bowl; pour over cream cheese layer just below crust edge. Sprinkle mozzarella cheese over egg layer.
                                    Watch Now Bake in the preheated oven until quiche is set and middle has risen, 40 to 50 minutes. Cool for 5 minutes before slicing.
                                    Watch Now
Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir chicken sausage and chorizo sausage in the hot oil until browned and cooked through, about 10 minutes. Drain excess grease. Stir sweet potato, garlic powder, cayenne pepper, salt, and pepper into sausage mixture; add chicken broth and simmer, adding more chicken broth if mixture gets too dry, until sweet potato is tender, 10 to 15 minutes. Mix zucchini and spinach into sweet potato-sausage mixture and simmer until zucchini is tender, 5 to 10 minutes. Drain excess liquid. Fill a large saucepan with 2 to 3 inches of water and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to medium-low and keep the water at a gentle simmer. Crack an egg into a small bowl then gently slip the egg into the simmering water, holding the bowl just above the surface of the water. Poach the egg until the whites are firm and the yolks have thickened but are not hard, 2 1/2 to 3 minutes. Remove egg from the water with a slotted spoon. Top sweet potato-sausage mixture with poached egg.
Whisk eggs, milk, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl. Spray a 2-quart baking dish with cooking spray. Spread bread pieces out in an even layer on the bottom of the prepared dish; top with sausage, Monterey Jack cheese, egg mixture, and Cheddar cheese, respectively. Cover the baking dish with plastic wrap and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Remove casserole from refrigerator and let sit at room temperature for 15 minutes. Bake casserole in the preheated oven until bubbling and hot throughout, about 45 minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Preheat oven to 275 degrees F (135 degrees C). Set a wire rack on a baking sheet and place in the oven. Whisk flour, sugar, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk buttermilk, egg, and oil together in a large bowl. Stir flour mixture into buttermilk mixture just until batter is combined. Pour batter into preheated waffle iron, leaving about 1/2-inch border; close iron and cook according to manufacturer's instructions, 3 to 5 minutes. Transfer cooked waffles to the rack in the oven. Continue cooking waffles with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Mix oatmeal, baking powder, and sugar together in a large bowl. Beat milk and egg together in a separate bowl; add to oatmeal mixture and stir to incorporate. Stir cranberries, coconut, and nuts into the oatmeal mixture; spread into the prepared baking dish. Bake in preheated oven until beginning to brown along the edges, 50 to 60 minutes.
Toss pear slices with 1/4 cup white sugar, lemon juice, and lemon zest to coat. Arrange butter in a 12-inch cast-iron skillet and place on the center rack of the oven. Heat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Remove skillet from oven once the butter has just melted, 3 to 5 minutes. Beat eggs in a large bowl until frothy; add milk, 1/4 cup white sugar, vanilla extract, and salt and mix until just combined. Sift flour into egg mixture and stir until batter is just mixed. Stir pear slices into the melted butter and spread into a single layer. Pour batter over pears. Bake in the preheated oven until pancake is set in the middle, the sides have risen, and the bottom is browned, 28 to 30 minutes. Top pancake with confectioners' sugar.
Cook sausages according to package directions; cut into 1/4-inch slices; set aside.  In a skillet, saute onion and bell pepper in oil until almost tender.  Stir in garlic and chili pepper; cook for 1 additional minute.  Add sausage and chilies; set aside.  In a bowl, combine cheeses, green onion and cilantro. In a greased, 13-in. x 9-in. x 2-in. baking dish, sprinkle one third of tortilla chips.  Follow with one-half of the sausage mixture and one-half of the cheese mixture; repeat.  In a bowl, beat eggs, milk, salt and pepper sauce; pour over layered ingredients.  Sprinkle with remaining tortilla chips. Bake, uncovered, at 350 degrees F for 45 to 50 minutes or until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean.  Let stand for 10 minutes before cutting.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease 1 large loaf pan. Blend bananas, chickpeas, butter, dates, almond flour, honey, eggs, baking soda, ginger, cinnamon, vanilla extract, and salt together in a blender or food processor until batter is smooth. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown and a knife inserted in the center of the loaf comes out clean, about 1 hour. Cool in pan for 15 minutes before slicing.
Mash half the banana in a saucepan. Whisk almond milk, honey, almond extract, cinnamon, and salt with the mashed banana until smooth; bring to a boil and stir oats into the mixture. Reduce heat to medium-low and cook at a simmer until the oats are tender and the moisture has been absorbed to your desired consistency, 5 to 7 minutes. Transfer oatmeal to a bowl. Dice remaining banana half. Top oatmeal with banana and more cinnamon, as desired.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a 12-cup muffin pan with foil baking cups and spray with cooking spray. Mix spinach, egg substitute, Cheddar cheese, onion, green bell pepper, and hot pepper sauce in a bowl. Divide spinach mixture evenly among prepared muffin cups. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, about 20 minutes.
Whisk buttermilk, eggs, and milk together in a bowl until blended; add oats and whisk until oats are wet, about 30 seconds. Set aside until oats absorb some liquid, about 5 minutes. Stir flour, sugar, baking powder, salt, baking soda, and cinnamon into the oat mixture; whisk until completely blended into a batter. Melt 1/2 teaspoon butter in a skillet over medium heat. Ladle batter into the skillet and cook until bubbles appear on the surface, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip with a spatula and continue cooking until browned on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes more. Repeat with remaining butter and batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Cook and stir sausage and onions in oil in heavy oven-proof 10-inch skillet on medium heat 5 minutes or until light golden brown. Combine remaining ingredients in medium bowl. Stir egg mixture into skillet mixture. Cook on medium heat, lifting with a rubber spatula once or twice, to allow uncooked portion to flow underneath. Cook just until egg mixture begins to set, about 6 minutes. Place skillet in oven. Bake 5 to 7 minutes or until egg mixture is firm to the touch and top is golden brown. Remove skillet from oven. Carefully run a spatula around edge of frittata to loosen from skillet. Invert skillet onto serving platter. Cut frittata into quarters. Garnish each portion with Parmesan cheese and basil, if desired.
Whisk the milk, cocoa powder, turbinado sugar, and almond extract together in a saucepan over medium-low heat until the sugar has dissolved; bring the mixture to a simmer. Stir the mashed banana and oatmeal into the milk mixture; cook at a simmer until the oatmeal is thickened and the banana has broken up slightly, about 5 minutes. Fold the slivered almonds into the oatmeal to serve.
Place a metal mixing bowl and beaters from an electric mixer into the freezer to chill. Trim the end crusts from the brioche bread, and slice the loaf in half; cut each half in half again (4 pieces), and cut each quarter in half to total 8 pieces of brioche. Place 2 cups of strawberries and the water into a saucepan over medium-high heat; cover the pan, and bring to a simmer. Gently steam the berries until they release their juice, about 5 minutes. Beat 1 cup of heavy cream, vanilla extract, and confectioners' sugar together with electric mixer in chilled metal bowl with the chilled beaters until the cream forms soft peaks; set aside. Whisk the eggs and remaining 1 cup cream together in a large bowl, and place the bread pieces into the mixture, spooning the cream over the bread to coat. Allow to stand for 5 minutes. Heat the butter in a skillet over medium heat until fragrant, and lay the coated brioche pieces into the skillet. Cook until the French toast is golden brown, about 3 minutes per side. To serve, place 2 pieces of French toast onto a plate, overlapping slightly. Ladle cooked strawberries and their juice over the French toast, and top with a generous dollop of whipped cream. Top the cream with several fresh strawberries.
Mix the ground coffee, allspice, and cinnamon in a small bowl, and place into the filter of a drip coffee maker. Pour 4 cups of water into the coffee maker, and turn on the machine. When coffee has finished dripping, pour into 2 cups. Stir in cream and sugar to taste.
Whisk together the milk, coffee, butter, and eggs in a bowl until evenly blended; set aside. In a large bowl, stir together the all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, sugar, baking soda, baking powder, salt, cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg, and cloves; pour the egg mixture into the flour mixture, and stir just until combined. Set aside for 10 to 15 minutes. Coat the bottom of a large skillet with cooking spray, and place pan over medium heat. Scoop large spoonfuls of batter onto the hot pan, and fry until bubbles appear on the surface. Flip and cook until browned on the other side. Continue with remaining batter.
Bring milk, water, chicken soup base, and smoked salt to a boil in a saucepan; slowly whisk in grits, reduce heat to low, and cover pan. Simmer until grits are tender and thick, about 20 minutes. Keep grits warm. Brown andouille sausage slices with vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat; remove sausage and set aside. Cook and stir green bell pepper, yellow onion, celery, and jalapeno pepper in the same skillet until onion is tender and translucent, about 10 minutes. Stir in garlic and Cajun seasoning; cook until fragrant, about 1 minute. Stir flour into the vegetables until well coated; gradually stir in fire-roasted tomatoes and white wine, cooking until the sauce begins to thicken, about 3 minutes. Reduce heat to low, stir bay leaf into the sauce, and simmer for 5 minutes; season with salt and black pepper. Mix cooked andouille sausage and shrimp into the sauce and cook, stirring often, until sausage is hot and shrimp are pink and no longer translucent, 5 to 8 minutes. Just before serving, stir Cheddar and Parmesan cheeses into grits until melted. To serve, spoon grits onto a serving plate and top with shrimp, sausage slices, and sauce. Garnish with chopped chives.
Arrange dinner roll dough in a grease tube pan. Heat butter and brown sugar in a small saucepan over medium-low heat until sugar is dissolved about 5 minutes; pour over rolls. Sprinkle with pecans and pudding mix. Mix white sugar and cinnamon in a bowl; sprinkle over pudding mix. Pour corn syrup evenly over cinnamon mixture. Cover tube pan with a sheet of greased aluminum foil and allow dough to rise overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Move rack to the lower half of the oven. Bake in preheated oven until golden brown, 35 to 40 minutes. Allow bread to rest for 10 to 15 minutes. Invert pan onto a baking sheet or large plate to serve.
In a mixing bowl, beat the 3 eggs; add oil, sugars and flavoring, mixing until foamy.  Blend in the flour, wheat germ, baking powder, soda, and salt.  Stir in zucchini and nuts.  Pour batter into 2 greased bread pans Bake at 325 degrees F (165 degrees C) for 1 hour.  Cool.
Toast bread. Heat butter in a small saucepan over medium heat.  Pour in egg and milk, and stir in black pepper.  Stirring constantly, cook eggs until light and fluffy.  Remove from heat and stir in salmon. Slice toast into triangles and place, with points in toward the middle, around a plate.  Spoon eggs into the center and serve warm.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place potatoes in a medium saucepan with enough water to cover. Bring to a boil, and cook 10 minutes, or until tender but firm; drain. Melt butter in a medium skillet over medium heat, and saute garlic and onions until tender. In a small bowl, mix the flour, milk, and eggs. In a medium bowl, mix potatoes, garlic and onions, flour mixture, broccoli, mushrooms, Cheddar cheese, and chicken. Transfer to a medium baking dish. Bake 25 minutes in the preheated oven, or until eggs are no longer runny and top is lightly browned.
In a blender, mix yogurt, oranges, banana, half-and-half and almond extract. Blend until smooth.
Place mango, banana, and ice cream into a blender, and sprinkle with white sugar, cinnamon, and nutmeg. Pour in milk and place the lid on the blender. Blend until smooth, then pour into cups to serve.
Grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Stir the brown sugar, corn syrup, and butter together in a saucepan over medium-high heat until bubbly. Pour into the prepared baking dish, then arrange the sliced French bread evenly over the syrup. Whisk together the eggs, milk, vanilla extract, flour, and salt until smooth. Pour over the French bread. Cover, and refrigerate overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Stir together the white sugar and ground cinnamon; sprinkle over the french toast. Bake in preheated oven until golden brown on top, about 50 minutes.
Gently stir together the warm water, molasses, honey, and yeast in a large bowl and let stand until foamy, about 5 minutes. Pour oil into the yeast mixture. In a separate bowl mix together all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, salt, pumpkin seeds, sunflower seeds, poppy seeds, 2 tablespoons of millet, barley flour, and vital wheat gluten. Stir the flour and seed mixture to the yeast mixture until it pulls together. Turn the dough out of the bowl onto a lightly floured surface. Knead for 7 to 8 minutes, adding additional flour as needed. Place the dough in a large oiled bowl, cover and let stand in a warm place until doubled in size, about 1 hour. Grease a 9x13 baking sheet. Punch down the risen dough and turn out of the bowl onto a lightly floured surface. Form into a round or oval loaf shape and place onto the prepared baking sheet. Cover the dough and allow to rise until doubled in size again, about 40 minutes. Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C) toward the end of this second rise. Slash the top of the loaf diagonally with a sharp razor blade or serrated knife, carefully brush with the beaten egg white, and sprinkle remaining millet seeds over the top. Bake in preheated oven until the bread sounds hollow when thumped on the side, 40 to 45 minutes.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease 2 loaf pans, 8 1/2 x 4 1/2 inches. To make the streusel topping, mix 1/4 cup of cut-up butter, 1/2 cup flour, brown sugar, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, and oats in a bowl until crumbly. Set aside. Cream the sugar and butter together in a bowl, and stir in the eggs. Add the bananas, buttermilk, and vanilla extract, and stir until the mixture is well blended. Beat in the flour, pumpkin pie spice, baking powder, cinnamon, and nuts. Scoop the batter into the prepared loaf pans. Sprinkle the top of each loaf with half the streusel topping. Bake in the preheated oven for 1 hour and 15 minutes, until the loaves have risen and the topping is browned. Let the banana bread cool in the pans for 5 minutes before turning out onto a wire rack to finish cooling.
Sift the rice flour, baking powder, baking soda, cinnamon, and salt in a bowl. In another bowl, whisk together the beaten eggs, soy yogurt, rice milk, and oil, and pour into the flour mixture. Stir briefly just to combine. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium-high heat. Scoop about 1/4 cup of batter per pancake onto the heated griddle, and cook for 1 to 2 minutes, until bubbles appear on the surface. Flip the pancake and cook 1 to 2 minutes more, until the pancake is golden brown on both sides.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Press the pie crust into a 9 inch glass pie plate, and press fingers along the upper edge to decorate. Bake in preheated oven until the crust is very lightly browned, about 12 minutes. Meanwhile, whisk together the eggs, cream, garlic powder, pepper, salt, and hot pepper sauce in a bowl until well blended. Fold in the surimi, green onions, roasted peppers, spinach, Cheddar cheese, and Parmesan cheese. Pour into the pie crust. Return to the oven, and bake 20 minutes. Turn the oven off, and leave the quiche in the oven until slightly firm, 20 to 30 minutes.
Heat milk in a medium saucepan until scalding and small bubbles are forming around the edges, but just before the milk reaches a boil. Remove pan from heat and stir in the water, butter, molasses, sugar, orange zest, anise seed, caraway seed, cardamom and salt; allow to step and cool 30 minutes at room temperature. In a bread maker, stir the yeast into the warm water and let sit for 5 minutes. Pour the cooled milk and spice mixture into the bread machine with the yeast mixture. Add the flour to the bread machine. Run the bread machine on the dough cycle. Grease two 9x5 inch loaf pans. When the dough cycle is complete, remove the dough from the machine, divide in half, form into 2 loaves, and place in the prepared loaf pans. Cover and allow to rise for 30 minutes, or until your finger leaves a small dent when you poke the loaves. Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake the loaves until they sound hollow when tapped on the bottom,  35 to 40 minutes. Brush the hot loaves with melted butter; cool before serving.
In a medium bowl, whisk together eggs, Worcestershire sauce, and hot pepper  sauce. Season with salt and pepper. Pour mixture into a wide, shallow dish. Layer 2 slices bread with equal amounts of the sliced ham and cheese; top with remaining bread slices to make sandwiches, and press down to secure filling. Dip sandwiches into egg mixture, and turn to coat both sides. Heat the oil in a griddle or frying pan over medium heat. Cook sandwiches 3 minutes on each side, or until golden brown and cheese has melted. Serve hot.
Heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add the sausage and hash brown. Fry until browned on one side, about 5 minutes. Turn them over to fry on the other side and add the tomato, bacon and mushrooms. The idea is to start cooking with the things that take the longest. When the tomato, bacon and mushrooms are just about cooked, crack the egg into the center and allow to cook. You might want to add a little more oil just to crisp the edges. Toast the slice of bread while the egg cooks and then spread butter on it. Serve everything on a plate with the toast on the side.
Place the zucchini, ice cubes, orange juice, sweetener, and vanilla extract into a blender. Cover, and blend until smooth, about 1 minute.
Place the tortillas into a microwave oven, and heat on high until warmed and pliable, 10 to 15 seconds. Spread each tortilla with cottage cheese and pineapple, sprinkle with granola cereal and brown sugar, and top with a sliced banana. Fold the top and bottom of each tortilla down, enclosing the filling, and roll the wrap tightly into a compact cylinder. Slice each wrap in half across the middle to serve.
Prepare rice according to package directions. Drain, and set aside to cool. Place eggs in a saucepan and cover with cold water. Bring water to a boil and immediately remove from heat. Cover and let eggs stand in hot water for 10 to 12 minutes. Remove from hot water, cool, peel and chop. Set aside. Place the haddock in a small skillet with the bay leaf. Pour in enough milk just to cover the fish. Bring to a simmer over medium heat, and cook gently until fish flakes. Remove fish from the pan, flake with a fork, and set aside. Discard milk and bay leaf. Melt butter in a skillet over medium-high heat. Stir in curry powder, then add the peas and onions. Fry for a couple of minutes, then add the cooked rice, eggs, and fish. Stir gently, and season with salt and pepper. Heat through, and serve with yogurt.
Heat 2 tablespoon oil in a large, nonstick skillet over medium-low heat. Fry potatoes and onion in oil for about 15 minutes. Stir in chorizo, if desired; cook for five more minutes, or until potatoes are soft and lightly browned and meat is cooked.  Season with salt and pepper to taste. Beat eggs together in a large bowl. Pour potato and onion mixture into eggs, and mix together. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a large, nonstick skillet over medium-low heat.  Carefully spread mixture evenly over the bottom of the pan. Cook without stirring for about 10 minutes. Then place a large plate over the pan, flip the pan to transfer the eggs onto the plate. Cooked side should be golden brown. Carefully slide tortilla back into pan, and cook the other side for 5 to 10 minutes.
In a shallow bowl, whisk together egg yolks, egg white, vanilla, rum extract, orange zest, water and 1 tablespoon honey. Coat bread slices in egg mixture; set aside. In a small saucepan, combine crushed pineapple, mandarin oranges, honey and maple syrup. Simmer over medium-low heat for 3 minutes. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Fry bread slices until brown on both sides. Serve hot with warm fruit sauce.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a bowl, stir together flour, savory and salt. Whisk milk with eggs; gradually whisk into flour mixture until smooth. Let stand for 30 minutes. Meanwhile, prick sausages with a fork; place in greased 13x9-inch baking dish. Bake in preheated oven, turning sausages once, for 25 to 30 minutes or until golden. Drain off all but 2 tablespoons fat. Remove from oven; increase temperature to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Whisk batter; pour over sausages. Bake for 25 to 30 minutes or until puffed and golden. Serve immediately.
Bring a pot of salted water to a boil.  Add potatoes and cook until tender but still firm, about 15 minutes. Drain, cool and chop. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Add the onions, peppers, garlic, tomatoes, and potatoes. Season with salt and pepper and cook until vegetables are soft, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle vegetable mixture with cheese. Crack eggs into the pan a couple of inches apart. Cover pan and allow eggs to cook to desired firmness. Remove pan from heat and serve.
Rinse and drain the rice, and place in a large pot. Stir in the salt and oil, and let stand for 5 minutes. Add the pork to the rice, and stir in the water. Bring to a boil, then simmer over medium heat for 15 minutes, or until the pork is cooked through. Remove the pork from the pot with a slotted spoon, and set aside. Continue to simmer the rice for 20 minutes. Chop the pork into small cubes, and mix with the salted egg and hundred-year egg. After the 20 minutes are up, stir the pork and egg mixture back into the congee along with the oyster sauce. Serve in bowls, and garnish with ginger and green onion. Have soy sauce and pepper on the side for seasoning.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13 inch pan. In a large bowl, mix together margarine and sugar until smooth. Mix in yolks. Stir in flour and baking powder alternately with the milk. In another bowl, beat egg whites until doubled in volume.  Fold beaten whites into the dough.  Spread into a greased 9 x 12 inch pan.  Slice bananas over the top of the dough.  In a small bowl, mix together the 2 tablespoons sugar and the cinnamon; sprinkle over bananas. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 30 to 35 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean. Allow to cool.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Arrange tart shells in 2 muffin tins; line shell each with a layer of pie weights or dried beans. Bake shells in the preheated oven until edges of crusts are lightly browned and about 75% cooked, 5 to 10 minutes. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels; crumble when cooled. Divide 1 cup Swiss cheese, bacon, and green onions evenly into the tart shells. Whisk eggs, milk, mustard, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl. Ladle egg mixture into each tart shell about 2/3 full. Top each tart with the remaining 1/4 cup Swiss cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until egg is set in the middle of each tart and shells are browned, 25 to 30 minutes.
Mix milk, oats, pumpkin puree, cinnamon, salt, ginger, allspice, and nutmeg together in a 4-quart microwave-safe bowl. Cook on High for 12 to 15 minutes, stirring once. Sprinkle brown sugar and pecan pieces over the oatmeal to serve.
Beat the eggs and sugar in a bowl until smooth. Pour in the cream, milk, vanilla extract, cinnamon, and nutmeg; whisk until smooth. Pour the crushed cereal into a shallow dish; set aside. Dip the egg bread into the egg mixture two pieces at a time until the egg has been soaked into the center of the slices, about 30 seconds per side. Press the soaked bread into the crushed cereal until coated on both sides. Set the finished slices aside on a piece of waxed paper. Melt the butter in a nonstick skillet over medium-high heat. Cook the French toast in the hot pan until golden on both sides, about 3 minutes per side.
Combine the flour and eggs and mix until smooth. Add the milk, soda water, vegetable oil, and salt and mix to combine; refrigerate the batter overnight. To make the pancakes, heat a lightly greased frying pan over medium heat. Remove the batter from the refrigerator and mix well. Pour 1/4 cup of the batter into the pan and cook the pancake for about one minute. Flip it over and cook for another minute, or until golden brown. Remove the pancake from the pan and place it on waxed paper. Repeat with the remaining batter, stacking the pancakes while keeping them separate with waxed paper. To make the filling, combine the chopped almonds, 1/2 cup sugar, milk, vanilla extract, and rum (if desired) in a saucepan. Cook and stir over low heat until the sugar is dissolved and the mixture is creamy. Allow it to cool slightly before filling the pancakes. For the chocolate topping, combine the water, 1/2 cup sugar, and chocolate in a saucepan and cook over low heat just until the chocolate melts. Remove the pan from the heat and add the margarine, stirring until melted and combined. Spread 1 heaping tablespoon of almond filling onto each pancake, rolling them up and placing them on a platter. (You will have 10 to 15 total, depending on their size.) Pour the chocolate topping over the platter of rolled pancakes. If desired, warm the platter in a microwave for about 30 seconds before serving.
Whisk together the flour, milk, eggs, honey, and salt in a bowl to make a smooth batter. Melt 1 tablespoon of butter in a nonstick crepe pan over medium heat until the foam disappears. Pour about 2 tablespoons of the batter into the pan, and swirl to cover the bottom of the pan with a thin layer of batter. Cook until the crepe is no longer runny, about 1 minute; flip and cook the other side for an additional 1 minute. Repeat with additional butter and crepe mix, to make 4 crepes. Set the crepes aside on paper towels. In a bowl, mix the cream cheese with 1/2 cup confectioners' sugar to make a creamy spread. Very gently stir in the berries. Spread the cream cheese filling evenly over the crepes and roll up. Refrigerate until chilled; slice in 1-inch sections to serve.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Lightly spray large baking sheet with non-stick cooking spray. Mix oats, almonds, sweetener, salt, and cinnamon in a large bowl. Stir applesauce and sugar together in a small saucepan; bring to a simmer over medium heat and immediately remove from heat. Stir vanilla into the applesauce mixture; pour over the oats mixture and toss to coat. Spread the mixture onto the prepared baking dish. Bake until golden brown, stirring occasionally, 20 to 30 minutes. Place baking sheet on a cooling rack until granola is completely cooled.
Put eggs, bacon, Cheddar cheese, onion, bell pepper, mushrooms, black pepper, paprika, garlic powder, and salt in a resealable sandwich bag; seal. Shake vigorously until thoroughly mixed. Squeeze out any excess air and reseal. Bring a pot of water to a boil. Place bag in the boiling water; cook until egg is completely cooked, about 13 minutes. Remove bag using tongs or a large strainer. Carefully open bag and roll omelet onto a plate.
Whisk whole wheat flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a bowl. Mix in brown sugar, breaking it up into pea-sized pieces. Beat eggs in a separate bowl and stir milk, applesauce, and vanilla extract into eggs. Make a well in the dry ingredients and pour in the milk mixture; stir until just combined. If batter is too thick, add more milk. Grease a skillet or griddle with vegetable oil and place over medium-high heat. Scoop 2 tablespoons of batter onto the hot skillet and cook pancake until browned on the bottom and bubbles appear in the top, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip the pancake and cook until browned, 2 or 3 more minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Whisk 1/2 cup milk, sugar, pumpkin puree, pumpkin pie spice, and vanilla extract in a small saucepan over low heat. Simmer for 5 minutes. Whisk in remaining 1/2 cup milk. Pour milk mixture through a fine-mesh sieve to remove pulp. Return milk mixture to saucepan and simmer, whisking, 2 minutes. Add espresso and whisk until foamy, 1 minute.
Spread 1 tablespoon chocolate-hazelnut spread onto one side of each of 2 slices cinnamon bread; top each with another bread slice to make 2 sandwiches. Beat milk, egg, and vanilla extract together in a shallow bowl until smooth. Soak each sandwich in the milk mixture until the bread is moistened, about 15 seconds per side. Prepare a nonstick pan with cooking spray and heat over medium-high heat. Cook sandwiches in the hot pan until browned on the bottom, about 2 minutes. Flip sandwiches and continue cooking until other side is browned, about 1 minute more.
Beat eggs in a bowl with half-and-half, sriracha, salt, and pepper until smooth. Melt butter in nonstick pan over medium-low heat, tilting the pan to cover surface entirely with butter. Cook egg mixture in pan, stirring to slowly scramble eggs, until the eggs are fully set, 3 to 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking pan. Beat eggs in a bowl using a fork. Add milk, garlic salt, and black pepper to eggs and beat until fully integrated. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Transfer bacon to a paper towel-lined plate and drain grease from skillet. Chop bacon. Saute red bell pepper and onion in the same skillet over medium-high heat until tender, 5 to 10 minutes. Spread spinach into the bottom of the prepared baking pan; top with bacon and red bell pepper mixture. Pour egg mixture over bacon mixture and sprinkle Monterey Jack cheese and Asiago cheese over egg mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean, 35 to 45 minutes.
Mix oats, water, milk, honey, sugar, vanilla extract, and salt together in a rice cooker. Cook oats in rice cooker until desired consistency is reached, 10 to 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Spray 2 baking sheets with cooking spray. Whisk oats, pastry flour, flax meal, cinnamon, salt, and baking soda together in a large bowl. Stir honey, egg whites, almond butter, and vanilla extract into oats mixture until dough is well-blended; mix in chocolate chips. Scoop dough into 36 balls and place on prepared baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly golden and set, 8 to 10 minutes. Cool on the baking sheet for 10 minutes, lightly loosen each cookie from the baking sheet, and continue cooling on the baking sheets for another 10 minutes.
Prepare jasmine rice as directed on package. Prepare brown gravy mix as directed on package and keep warm. Divide ground beef into 4 servings and shape into patties. Heat oil in large skillet over medium heat. Saute onion until translucent, 8 to 10 minutes. Push onions to sides of skillet. Place burger patties in center of skillet. Pan fry until cooked throughout, about 4 minutes per side. An instant-read thermometer inserted into the center should read 140 degrees F (60 degrees C). Spray a separate skillet with non-stick cooking spray; set over medium-high heat. Cook eggs until set, and turn. Divide hot cooked rice into mounds on four plates. Sprinkle each mound with 1/4 of sauteed onions. Place 1 beef patty over each stack. Ladle gravy over ground beef patty. Place 1 over-easy egg over each patty/gravy. Enjoy!
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease 9x13-inch baking dish. Whisk eggs, milk, brown sugar, butter, vanilla extract, ground cinnamon, and ground nutmeg together in a bowl. Stir bread cubes and bananas into egg mixture until coated; pour into prepared baking dish. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted in center comes out clean, 35 to 40 minutes.
Line a cutting board with parchment paper. Unfold puff pastry onto cutting board. Cut each sheet into 4 equal squares. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Grease with cooking spray. Place one puff pastry square in the preheated waffle iron; cook until golden brown, 3 to 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining puff pastry squares.
Mix almond flour, coconut flour, sweetener, salt, baking powder, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Whisk in eggs, heavy cream, butter, and vanilla extract slowly until batter is just blended. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Combine flour, oats, brown sugar, baking powder, baking soda, cinnamon, and salt in a large bowl. Mix buttermilk, butter, egg, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Add to flour mixture; stir until just combined. Fold butterscotch chips into batter; allow to rest 5 minutes. Heat a large nonstick skillet over medium-low heat; coat with cooking spray. Pour in 1/3 cup batter; spread with the back of a spoon into a circle just over 1/4-inch thick. Cook until edges are set; 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook 1 to 2 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a 10-inch pie plate. Press spinach in an even, compact layer into the bottom of the prepared pie plate. Beat milk, ham, eggs, baking mix, onion, Cheddar cheese, and Monterey Jack cheese together in a bowl; pour over the spinach layer. Bake in preheated oven until quiche is set in the middle, 35 to 40 minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to the manufacturer's instructions, and spray with cooking spray. In a shallow bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, vanilla extract, sugar, and cinnamon. Dip each piece of white bread into the egg mixture. Cook in the preheated waffle iron until golden brown, 1 to 2 minutes.
Sift the flour, salt, and baking soda together in a bowl. Add the buttermilk and egg yolks; stir until you have a batter. In a separate large glass or metal mixing bowl, beat the egg whites until foamy until soft peaks form. Lift your beater or whisk straight up: the egg whites will form soft mounds rather than a sharp peak. Fold the egg whites into the prepared batter. Place an aebleskiver pan over medium heat; prepare each cup with cooking spray. Pour the batter into each cup to about 2/3 full. Cook until golden brown on each side, using a toothpick to flip, 1 to 2 minutes per side.
Heat vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir sausage until browned and crumbly, about 8 minutes. Gently mix cornbread with sausage and cook until heated through, about 3 minutes. Stir eggs into sausage and cornbread, one at a time, cooking until eggs are scrambled and firm. Stir bell pepper and onion mix into skillet; cook until heated through, stirring occasionally, about 5 minutes. Season with hot sauce, salt, and black pepper.
Whisk eggs and salt together in a bowl. Gradually stir flour into eggs, alternately with 2 cups milk until fully incorporated. Beat 1/4 cup vegetable oil and 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon into flour mixture. Refrigerate batter for at least 1 hour. Mix apples, sugar, 2 teaspoons cinnamon, and 2 tablespoons water in a pot. Whisk cornstarch and 1 tablespoon water in a small bowl; pour into apple mixture. Simmer apple mixture over medium heat, stirring often, until thickened, 8 to 10 minutes. Keep warm. Whisk 1 1/2 tablespoons milk into chilled batter. Heat about 1 teaspoon vegetable oil in a crepe or frying pan over medium heat. Pour about 1/3 cup batter into the heated oil; tip and rotate the crepe pan until the batter covers the entire area. Cook until the edges begin to curl away from the sides of the pan, about 30 seconds; flip the crepe and continue cooking until lightly golden on the other side, about 30 more seconds. Remove crepe from pan, add more oil, and repeat with remaining batter. Spoon the apple filling into each crepe; fold crepe over the filling and serve.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Heat 3 tablespoons of the reserved marinade from the artichoke hearts in a large skillet. Cook and stir green onions in hot marinade until wilted, 2 to 3 minutes. Stir cooked green onions, eggs, Cheddar cheese, saltine crackers, parsley, garlic, hot pepper sauce, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl; pour into a 9x13-inch baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until center is puffy and no longer moist, about 40 minutes; cool slightly before cutting into squares.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13 inch baking pan. Layer tortillas in bottom of pan so that edges overlap. In a large bowl, beat together eggs and milk. Stir in cheeses, red pepper and green chiles. Pour egg mixture over tortillas. Bake in preheated oven until eggs are set, about 25 to 35 minutes. Meanwhile, heat oil in a skillet or frying pan over medium heat. Add mushrooms and green pepper; saute until tender. Stir in enchilada sauce and heat until  warmed through. Spoon enchilada sauce over baked eggs and serve.
Coat a 9x13 inch baking dish with cooking spray.  Layer bread, kielbasa, onions, and 1 1/2 cups cheese in pan.  In bowl combine eggs, milk, dry mustard, salt, and pepper.  Mix well and pour over mixture in the pan, making sure to coat all pieces of bread.  Sprinkle with remaining cheese and refrigerate overnight. The next morning, preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Combine half and half with nutmeg; pour evenly over the casserole. Bake in preheated oven for 45 to 55 minutes, until golden and puffed. Allow to cool 15 minutes before serving.
Arrange bread in the bottom of a lightly greased medium baking dish, and drizzle with butter. Top with Swiss cheese, Monterey Jack cheese, and ham. In a medium bowl, blend eggs, milk, and mustard. Season with salt and pepper. Pour into the baking dish. Cover, and refrigerate 8 hours, or overnight. Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Blend sour cream and Parmesan cheese in a small bowl, and set aside. Bake the layered mixture 1 hour in the preheated oven. Spread sour cream mixture over the surface of the baked dish, and continue cooking about 10 minutes, until surface is lightly browned. Allow to sit about 15 minutes before serving.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a small saucepan over medium heat, combine the dates and water. Cook stirring occasionally until the mixture forms a thick paste. Remove from heat and set aside. In a large bowl, mix together the oats, walnuts, raisins, wheat germ, sunflower seeds, and coconut. Spread out in a thin layer onto a baking sheet. If your baking sheet is small, this can be done in batches. Bake for 7 minutes in the preheated oven, or until lightly toasted. Transfer the mixture back into the bowl, and mix in the date paste, apple juice concentrate, and oil. Return to the baking sheet and bake for an additional 7 to 10 minutes, stirring occasionally until lightly browned. Granola will become more crispy as it cools. Store in an airtight container.
Spray or lightly grease a large skillet and heat over medium heat. Crack 3 eggs into a glass measuring cup and beat with a fork or whisk until scrambled. Pour eggs into heated skillet, swirling the pan to coat the bottom. Cover and let cook until eggs are firm, about 2 minutes. Top with 1/4 each of the chopped ham, turkey, green onions, tomato, parsley, green bell pepper, and Cheddar cheese. Fold egg in half over fillings, and serve warm. Repeat with remaining ingredients for 4 omelets.
Cut meat into 8 slices. Cook in a large skillet until browned on both sides. Remove from skillet, and keep warm. In a shallow dish, beat eggs and milk together. Dip bread quickly in egg mixture, coating both sides. Fry two at a time in skillet until done on both sides. Wrap one piece of meat with one slice of French toast.
In a medium bowl, mix together the pancake mix, coffee creamer, and cinnamon sugar. Add the water, soy milk, honey and vanilla; mix until just blended, but do not over mix or the pancakes will be tough. Heat a griddle or large skillet over medium heat. Spray with non-stick cooking spray. Use about 2 tablespoons of batter per pancake, and spoon onto the griddle. Cook until bubbles form, then flip and brown on the other side.
In a large bowl, mix the potatoes, green onions, corned beef, and egg. Season with salt and pepper. Form the mixture into golf ball sized balls. Heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat. Place the potato balls a few at a time into the skillet, flatten with a spatula, and fry 7 minutes on each side, until crisp and golden brown. Drain on paper towels.
Heat 2 Tbs. oil over low heat in a 12-inch non-stick skillet (so potatoes don't stick). While skillet heats, prepare onion and ham as directed above. A few minutes before cooking, increase heat to medium-high. When oil starts to send up wisps of smoke, add onion and ham; cook, stirring often, until golden brown, 7 to 8 minutes. Meanwhile, dice potatoes and toss with remaining oil. Transfer ham mixture to a bowl and reserve. Add potatoes to empty skillet; cook, stirring only occasionally so they form a golden-brown crust, about 10 minutes. As potatoes cook, mix ketchup, mustard, dried thyme, fresh parsley and 2 Tbs. of water. (Recipe can be prepared to this point up to 2 hours ahead. Spread hot potatoes on a large lipped cookie sheet; cover when cool. Return skillet to medium-high; add potatoes and re-crisp.) Return reserved ham mixture to skillet; stir in ketchup mixture, then season with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring frequently, until hash has nicely browned, about 5 minutes longer.
Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat. When the oil is hot, add the eggs, and green onion; cook and stir until the eggs are almost solid. Add the tomatoes, and cook until eggs are firm. Season with salt, and serve.
In a medium bowl, stir together 1/2 cup milk, 1 1/2 tablespoons melted butter, egg yolk, vanilla, and 2 teaspoons hazelnut liqueur. Whisk 1 tablespoon cocoa into liquid until completely incorporated. Next, whisk in 2 tablespoons confectioners' sugar until completely incorporated. Then gradually whisk in flour until completely incorporated. Set aside. Melt 1/2 tablespoon butter in a saucepan over low heat. Stir 1 tablespoon milk and 2 teaspoons hazelnut liqueur into melted butter. Stir in 1 tablespoon cocoa and 2 tablespoons confectioners' sugar. Set over very low heat to keep warm. Spray a non-stick frying pan or crepe pan with cooking spray, and heat over medium heat. Pour about 1/4 cup of batter onto the pan, and swirl to form a very thin disk; cook for about 2 minutes. Flip, and cook about 1 minute more. Place crepe on a plate. Add 1/4 sliced bananas to crepe, and spoon 1/4 of the chocolate sauce over the bananas. Roll or fold crepe, and sprinkle with confectioners' sugar. Repeat steps 3 and 4. Serve crepes warm.
Place the pear slices in a skillet, and pour in the apple juice. Cook over medium heat until the pears are soft, about 5 minutes. Drain pears and reserve; discard juice. Meanwhile, place the bacon in a skillet and cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain on paper towels. Crumble and set aside. Preheat the oven broiler. Place the focaccia bread slices on a baking sheet. Divide the pear slices evenly among the bread, and top evenly with the bacon, and then with the blue cheese. Broil the sandwiches in the preheated broiler until the cheese melts, about 2 minutes.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). In a large non-stick skillet over medium heat, cook the bacon and sausages, until they are browned.  Reserving the fat in the pan, transfer to a heat resistant dish. Keep warm in the oven. Fry both sides of the potato and soda farls in the reserved fat for a few minutes, or until they are golden and crispy. Meanwhile, heat oil in smaller skillet over medium heat and cook black pudding slices and tomato halves. Transfer everything to the dish in the oven to keep warm. Crack eggs into the pan with any residual bacon grease, adding more oil to the skillet if necessary.  Fry until egg whites are set but yolks are still runny, or to your liking. Divide everything onto 2 separate plates and serve immediately.
In a bowl, stir together eggs, tomato, and bacon. Season with salt and pepper.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Lightly grease a 10-inch square baking dish and line it with parchment paper. Place the pumpkin in a microwave-safe bowl; cover and cook in microwave on full power, stirring halfway through cooking time, until tender, about 5 minutes. Place the potato in a microwave-safe bowl; cover and cook in microwave on full power until tender enough to pierce with a fork, about 4 minutes. Combine the pumpkin and potato in a large bowl. Add the spinach, feta cheese, Cheddar cheese, and eggs; stir. Transfer mixture to prepared dish; top with sliced onion. Bake in preheated oven until firm, about 25 minutes. Allow to rest 5 minutes before serving.
Juice the apple, pineapple, carrots, ginger, celery, and beet in a juice machine.  Sweeten with sugar if desired.
Heat a Belgian waffle iron. Mix the flour, sugar, and baking powder together in a mixing bowl. Stir in 1 cup eggnog, butter, and the egg until well blended. Add more eggnog if needed to make a pourable batter. Lightly grease or spray the waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray. Pour some batter onto the preheated waffle iron, close the top, and cook until golden brown and crisp on both sides. Waffles are usually cooked with steam subsides. Transfer waffles to a serving plate, and keep warm. Meanwhile, place the raspberry preserves in a pan, and heat over medium heat until pourable. To serve, drizzle raspberry preserves over each waffle, and top with raspberries. If desired, add a dollop of whipped cream to each waffle.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Melt butter in a saucepan over medium heat. Stir in flour until smooth. Gradually whisk in evaporated milk and water. Season with salt, white pepper and cayenne pepper. Cook, stirring frequently, until thickened. Arrange sliced eggs in a medium baking dish. Pour sauce over eggs. Place cheese slices on top. Bake in preheated oven for 15 to 20 minutes. Place toast on plates, and spoon egg mixture over.
In a blender, combine soy milk, orange juice, wheat germ and frozen berries. Blend until smooth. Pour into glasses and serve.
In a medium bowl, beat together the eggs, milk, maple syrup, vanilla, and cinnamon. Take a small handful of cornflakes and crumble them into the mixture. Stir well. Soak the bread slices in the mixture for about 2 to 3 minutes. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat.  Place the bread slices in the pan; brown on both sides. Sprinkle with confectioners' sugar; serve hot.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease 12 muffin cups or line with paper muffin liners. Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Combine baking mix, butter and boiling water.  Divide biscuit mixture between muffin cups. Spread covering bottom and up the sides a little. Sprinkle sausage and onions. Stir together eggs and cream. Pour equal amounts of egg mixture into muffin cups. Cover with Swiss cheese. Bake in preheated oven for 25 minutes, until eggs are set.
Preheat a skillet over medium heat. Combine eggs and milk in a large bowl; beat well. Add ham to preheated skillet and warm until juicy. Add eggs and stir regularly until they start to set.  While eggs are still soft, add cheese. Cook until eggs are firm and cheese is melted. Season with salt and pepper to taste and serve.
Add ingredients in order suggested by your manufacturer. Select fruit bread or basic bread setting. Add raisins when indicated by your manufacturer.
In a large bowl mix together flour, non-fat dry milk powder, baking powder, and salt. Cut in 5 tablespoons of the lard into the dry mixture until it resembles fine crumbs. Add the ice water and mix until the dough pulls cleanly away from the sides of the bowl. Cover with a towel and set aside for 2 hours. Divide the dough into two large pieces. Shape each piece into a circle. Roll each piece out on a lightly floured board to 1/4 inch thick. Make 2 parallel cuts through the dough without cutting all the way through. Let the dough rest briefly. Heat the remaining lard in a large cast iron skillet over medium-high heat. Once it is hot, add the first shaped dough.  Fry for 4-5 minutes on the first side, until golden, turn over and finish cooking on the second side for 3-4 minutes. Remove the bread from the skillet and drain onto paper towels. Sprinkle with sea salt, if desired. Keep warm while second section cooks. Cut bread into wedges. Serve warm.
In a large bowl, mix together oil, pumpkin, sugars, pudding mixes, cinnamon, and salt.  Slightly beat the eggs, and mix into the batter.  Mix in flour and baking soda until just combined.  Stir in nuts, if desired.  Spread batter into two greased and floured 9 x 5 inch loaf pans. Bake at 325 degrees F (165 degrees C) for 1 hour, or until a tester inserted in the center comes out clean.
Butter one 3 quart casserole dish and set aside. Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until crumbled and evenly brown. Drain and set aside. Place bread cubes in prepared casserole dish. Whisk together the eggs, soup, milk and salt; pour over bread cubes. Add sausage and sprinkle with shredded cheese. Cover with foil and refrigerate overnight. The next morning, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and bake for 1 hour.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Whisk together the eggs, milk, sugar, cinnamon, nutmeg, and orange rind in a medium mixing bowl. Cut the bread into seven or eight slices, and lay them, overlapping, in a large baking dish. Pour the egg mixture over the bread, covering every slice. The bread should not be entirely submerged though; the higher parts should become toasted and crispy. Dot the bread with the butter. Bake the French toast in the oven for 35 to 45 minutes until the custard is set. Serve immediately.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Generously grease or spray with non-stick cooking spray a 9-inch square baking dish or similar sized baking dish. Cut each biscuit into 4 equal pieces;  set aside. Sprinkle 1 cup of the ham, 1 cup of the apples and all the raisins over the bottom of the prepared pan, spreading evenly.  Arrange biscuit pieces, pointed ends up, over the mixture.  Sprinkle evenly with remaining ham and apples. In a small mixing bowl combine brown sugar, 1/2 teaspoon apple pie spice, maple syrup and egg, blending thoroughly. Stir in nuts, then spoon evenly over biscuit pieces and ham/apple mixture. Bake in preheated oven for 35 to 45 minutes, or until nicely browned. Cool for 5 minutes, then drizzle Spice Spiked Glaze over warm coffeecake. To Make Spice Spiked Glaze:  In a small bowl whisk together the confectioners' sugar, bourbon, 1/4 teaspoon apple pie spice, and cayenne pepper until a drizzling consistency is reached (more bourbon or milk may be added if necessary to achieve desired consistency).
Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake thawed pastry shell at 375 degrees F (190 degrees C) for 10 minutes. Remove from oven and let cool. Reduce oven temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Meanwhile, in a medium bowl, combine the sour cream, bacon, cheese, French-fried onions, eggs, Worcestershire sauce and ground black pepper. Mix all together well and pour into the cooled pie shell. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 35 to 45 minutes, or until quiche is set.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour a 4 1/2x8 1/2-inch loaf pan. Stir and coat blueberries with 2 tablespoons cake flour in a bowl. Mix coated blueberries, oats, pecans, 1 1/2 cups plus 3 tablespoons cake flour, baking soda, and salt in a bowl. Beat white sugar, 1/2 cup brown sugar, Greek yogurt, and applesauce together in a large bowl until light and fluffy. Add eggs, one at a time; beat after each addition. Add vanilla extract and mashed banana; beat lightly until well blended. Stir blueberry-flour mixture into yogurt mixture until just moistened. Spoon batter into prepared pan. Cut butter into 1/4 cup brown sugar in a small bowl until crumbly; sprinkle over batter. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of the bread comes out clean, about 55 minutes. Cool in the pan for 15 minutes; remove from pan and cool on wire rack for 1 hour.
Blend milk, blueberries, Greek yogurt, oats, and flax seed in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Melt butter in a cast-iron skillet in the preheating oven. Combine peach slices, brown sugar, and cinnamon in a bowl; gently toss to coat the peaches well. Beat eggs, milk, flour, vanilla extract, salt, and nutmeg together in a bowl until batter well-combined but a little lumpy; pour into skillet. Top batter with the peach mixture. Bake in preheated oven until set in the middle, about 20 minutes.
Cook bacon in a large skillet over medium-high heat until evenly browned, about 5 minutes per side. Transfer to a plate lined with paper towel to drain and cool. Cook sausage links in the same skillet until no longer pink in the center, 7 to 10 minutes. An instant-read thermometer inserted into the center should read 160 degrees F (70 degrees C). Transfer to plate with the bacon to cool and drain. Drain most of the grease from the skillet and return to medium heat. Cook and stir eggs until scrambled and no longer wet, about 5 minutes; season with salt and pepper. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Roll crescent roll dough out to cover bottom of a 9x13-inch baking dish. Bake dough until golden brown, about 10 minutes. Spread salsa in a layer onto the baked dough; top with the scrambled eggs. Crumble the bacon and sprinkle over the eggs. Slice sausage links and scatter evenly among the bacon crumbles. Top the entire pizza with Cheddar cheese. Bake in oven until cheese is melted and beginning to brown, about 10 minutes. Allow to cool 10 minutes before cutting to serve.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly oil a 9x13-inch baking dish. Toss tomatoes and parsley in vinaigrette. Drain and set aside. Beat eggs in a bowl; whisk in yogurt and milk. Pour egg mixture into prepared baking dish. Evenly distribute the tomatoes, bacon, chicken, avocados, and blue cheese on the egg mixture. Sprinkle with chives. Season with salt and pepper. Bake 25 minutes in the preheated oven, until eggs are cooked through, puffy, and beginning to brown.
Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat, and cook and stir the sausage until browned and crumbly, about 5 minutes. Remove from skillet, drain off the excess fat, and set aside. Place the potatoes, green peppers, and red peppers into the skillet, and cook, stirring occasionally, until the potatoes are browned and the peppers are softened, about 15 minutes. Return the sausage to the skillet, and pour the eggs over the top. Cook and stir 3 to 5 minutes until the eggs are set, and serve.
Scrape the cheese and toppings off the pizza crust, it may help to heat the pizza in the microwave. Discard the crust. Heat the toppings and milk in a small saucepan over medium heat. Stir until the topping and milk combine, it should be a soft clumpy consistency. Remove from the heat. Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat. Whisk the eggs, Italian seasoning, onion powder, salt, and pepper in a bowl. Pour in eggs and cook without stirring for 1 minute. Add the pizza toppings to the eggs; cook, stirring constantly, until eggs reach the desired consistency.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Pour milk into a shallow dish; empty the packet of seasoned coating into a large plastic zipper bag. Divide the pork sausage into 6 equal portions, and cover each egg completely with a layer of sausage. Roll the sausage and egg balls in the milk, and place in the plastic bag. Seal the bag, and gently shake until balls are covered with seasoned coating. Place the coated sausage and egg balls onto a rack over a baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown and slightly crisp, about 30 minutes.
Bring the water to a boil in a large pot, and stir in the tea bags, raspberries, and sugar until the sugar has dissolved. Allow the mixture to steep until the desired level of tea flavor is reached, 3 to 5 minutes; remove tea bags, and stir in the lemonade mix until dissolved. Pour tea into pitchers, and add ice to cool.
Preheat an oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat and stir in the sausage and onion. Cook and stir until the sausage is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink. Drain and discard any excess grease. Transfer sausage mixture to the prepared baking dish. Whisk together the eggs and milk. Stir in the nacho cheese soup and 1 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese. Pour egg mixture over the sausage, and top with the remaining 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until the eggs are set, about 30 minutes.
Beat the cream cheese with an electric mixer until smooth. Blend in the eggs. Stir in the flour, sugar, and 1 teaspoon of melted butter to make a batter. Heat remaining 1 teaspoon of butter on a griddle or in a heavy frying pan over medium heat. Drop the batter onto the griddle in silver dollar-sized dollops; cook until lightly golden brown, about 3 minutes. Turn the pancakes over and cook an additional 2 minutes. To serve, sprinkle with confectioners' sugar and drizzle with lemon juice. Serve with lemon wedges.
Combine water and salt together in a saucepan; bring to a boil. Add oats; cook and stir until halfway tender, 2 to 3 minutes. Stir flax, brown sugar, cinnamon, and vanilla extract into oatmeal; continue cooking until oats are tender, water is boiled off, and desired cereal consistency is reached, 2 to 3 minutes more. Stir milk and blueberries into oatmeal.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease an 8-inch square baking dish. Beat applesauce and white sugar together in a bowl. Add oats, milk, eggs, baking powder, and salt to applesauce mixture; beat until evenly mixed. Stir banana into oat mixture. Pour batter into prepared baking dish. Stir brown sugar and cinnamon together in a small bowl; sprinkle mixture over banana batter. Bake in the preheated oven until firm, 30 to 35 minutes. Cool for 5 minutes before slicing into bars.
Blend milk, yogurt, banana, strawberries, and chocolate-hazelnut spread together in a blender until smooth.
Stir coconut milk and vinegar together in a bowl; set aside until the coconut milk tastes sour, about 5 minutes. Mix flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a large mixing bowl. Beat egg and melted butter into the coconut milk mixture; pour into the flour mixture and whisk together until no lumps remain in the batter. Prepare a large skillet with cooking spray and place over medium heat. Ladle batter into the skillet 1/4 cup at a time; cook until bubbles appear on the top of the pancake, about 5 minutes. Flip the pancake and continue cooking until the bottom is browned and the center is cooked through, 2 to 3 minutes more.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage and water in the hot skillet until sausage is browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 9x13-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Spread crescent roll dough out into prepared baking dish to cover the inside of the dish completely. Prick dough all over with a fork. Bake in the preheated oven until slightly set, about 5 minutes. Beat eggs, milk, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl. Spray a large skillet with cooking spray and place skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir egg mixture in hot skillet until eggs are set, 3 to 5 minutes. Break up eggs into small pieces using a wooden spoon. Spread eggs evenly over crescent roll dough, spread sausage over eggs, and top with Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until crust is browned and casserole is hot, about 25 minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Grease the inside of the waffle iron. Mix all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk milk, bananas, canola oil, eggs, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl; stir into flour mixture until batter is moistened with a few lumps. Spoon about 1/4 cup batter into preheated waffle iron and cook according to manufacturer's instructions.
Blend milk, oats, ice cubes, banana, molasses, ginger, cinnamon, vanilla extract, and cloves in a blender until smooth.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees. Grease a 2 quart baking dish. Layer the bread, ham, 2 cups cheese and 2 tablespoons chives in the dish. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, 1/4 teaspoon salt and 1/2 teaspoon pepper. Pour into the dish and top with the tomato slices in an even layer. Bake the eggs until nearly set, about 30 minutes. Sprinkle the remaining 1/2 cup of cheese and 1 tablespoon chives on top and bake until golden.
Blend oranges, spinach, water, pineapple, grapes, ice, and flax seed in a blender until smooth.
Place apples in a blender. Add milk, flour, eggs, shortening, baking powder, salt, and cinnamon and blend until well mixed, scraping down sides of blender several times. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle; cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 1 minute. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat the oven or toaster oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Lightly grease a baking sheet. Lightly coat both sides of poblano pepper with olive oil; place pepper, opened like a butterfly with cut side up, onto the prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until pepper is tender and skin starts to brown, 20 to 30 minutes. Whisk eggs and milk together in a bowl; fold in tomato, mushroom, green onion, cilantro, salt, and black pepper. Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir egg mixture in the melted butter until eggs are set, about 5 minutes. Spoon egg mixture into poblano pepper and top with Cheddar-Monterey Jack cheese. Bake in the oven until cheese is melted, 3 to 5 minutes.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, 5 to 8 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch pie plate. Melt 1 tablespoon butter in a nonstick skillet over medium-low heat. Pour in eggs; cook, stirring often with a spatula, until soft and fluffy, 3 to 5 minutes. Transfer to a plate to cool. Season with salt and pepper. Remove cinnamon rolls from the packaging. Stand each roll on its side and press down into a rectangle, trapping the cinnamon sugar layers. Roll each rectangle into a thin 6-inch circle. Spread 1 tablespoon cream cheese over each circle of dough. Layer 1/4 cup scrambled egg, 1/4 cup Cheddar cheese, and 1 tablespoon bacon pieces on top. Bring dough up and over the filling, pinching edges together to enclose filling completely. Place rolls seam-side down in the prepared pie plate. Heat remaining 1 tablespoon butter in a small microwave-safe bowl until melted, about 10 seconds. Brush over rolls. Season with salt and pepper. Bake in the preheated oven, rotating halfway, until rolls are a deep golden brown, 20 to 22 minutes. Transfer pie plate to a wire rack; let rolls cool for 15 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add sweet potato; cover and cook, stirring occasionally, until tender, 8 to 10 minutes. Transfer to a large bowl. Cook and stir sausage in the same skillet over medium-high heat until crumbled and browned, about 5 minutes. Add to the sweet potato in the bowl. Cook and stir onion and red bell pepper in the same skillet until tender, about 3 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. Add mushrooms and kale; cook until kale softens, about 3 minutes more. Transfer to the bowl. Whisk eggs, water, thyme, salt, and pepper together in a small bowl. Stir into the sausage mixture. Pour into a large baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until sweet potato starts to brown, 20 to 25 minutes. Let stand for 5 minutes. Garnish with green onion.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Mix mashed bananas, milk, egg, honey, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Stir in oats, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt. Spoon batter into mounds on the baking sheet, spacing them a few inches apart. Bake in the preheated oven until top looks dry and edges are golden, about 15 minutes.
Heat heavy cream and butter in a small saucepan until barely simmering. Crack each egg into a small bowl. Slide one egg at a time into the heated cream mixture. Sprinkle salt, pepper, and red pepper flakes on top. Cover and cook over low heat until white begins to set, about 2 minutes. Uncover and add shredded Cheddar cheese. Recover and cook until yolk is desired doneness, about 2 minutes more. Serve eggs and cream topped with scallions.
Whisk flour, cornmeal, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl. Add 1/3 cup vegetable oil, eggs, and buttermilk and whisk until batter is well blended. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions and brush with oil. Pour batter into the preheated waffle iron, covering 2/3 of the grid. Close and bake according to manufacturer's instructions. Repeat with remaining batter.
Crack egg into a microwave-safe mug; beat until even in color. Pour in milk and beat until light yellow in color. Heat in microwave until cooked through and fluffy, about 90 seconds. Sprinkle pepper over egg.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes. Drain and discard grease. Coat a 9x13-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Spread a thin layer of Colby-Jack cheese in the bottom of the prepared baking dish. Crack eggs on top of the cheese layer and break the yolks but do not stir. Layer crumbled sausage over eggs and top with remaining cheese. Drizzle cream on top. Cover baking dish and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until set, about 1 hour. Let stand for 10 minutes before slicing.
Heat oil in skillet over medium heat. Add eggs to skillet. Cook, pulling cooked portion to the center.  Add bacon and continue cooking until eggs are firm. Remove from heat. To assemble burritos, evenly portion heated beans down center of each tortilla. Top beans with egg mixture, cheese, avocado and cilantro. Fold in opposite sides of each tortilla, and then roll up, burrito-style. Cut diagonally in half and serve with salsa and sour cream
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Stir eggs, mayonnaise, mustard, honey, horseradish, cayenne pepper, and hot pepper sauce together in a bowl; season with salt and black pepper. Place English muffins, cut-side up, on an ungreased baking sheet. Place 1 slice Canadian bacon on each muffin. Spoon 1/4 cup of egg mixture on top of bacon and sprinkle with pepper jack cheese. Top with green onions. Bake in preheated oven until cheese melts, 6 to 8 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line 2 bread pans with parchment paper or spray with cooking spray. Whisk zucchini, oil, 1 cup white sugar, brown sugar, eggs, and vanilla extract together in a bowl until well mixed. Combine all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, baking soda, salt, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, and baking powder together in a separate bowl. Gradually stir flour mixture into zucchini mixture until batter is just combined; fold in plums. Pour batter into the prepared pans. Mix 1 tablespoon white sugar and 1 teaspoon cinnamon together in a small bowl; sprinkle over batter. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 1 hour. Cool in the pans for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Stir in cream cheese. Unroll crescent dough and separate into individual pieces; spoon 2 to 3 teaspoons sausage mixture onto each piece of dough. Roll dough around filling. Brush each crescent roll with egg white. Arrange crescent rolls on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until rolls are lightly browned, about 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Stir oatmeal, eggs, bananas, milk, white sugar, flaxseed oil, applesauce, brown sugar, and baking powder together in a bowl using a spoon; pour into a square baking dish. Bake in preheated oven until the edges begin to brown, about 40 minutes.
Stir apple, raisins, coconut oil, cinnamon, and pumpkin pie spice together in a saucepan over medium heat. Bring to a simmer and cook to blend flavors, about 5 minutes. Blend banana, eggs, almond milk, almond butter, and vanilla together in a food processor. Add walnuts and pecans to banana mixture and blend. Stir banana mixture and maple syrup into apple mixture; bring to a simmer and cook until thick, 5 to 10 minutes.
Blend almond milk, oats, strawberries, banana, agave nectar, and vanilla extract in a blender until smooth.
Blend orange juice, mango, banana, yogurt, and oats together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a casserole dish. Rinse shredded potatoes in a colander with cold water; drain and squeeze potatoes to remove liquid. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat; add potato. Season potato with salt and pepper; stir. Place a cover on the skillet and cook until potato is tender, about 3 minutes. Heat a separate skillet over medium-high heat. Cook sausage in the skillet, breaking with a spatula into crumbles, until completely browned, 5 to 7 minutes. Stir potatoes into the sausage and remove skillet from heat. Spread the sausage and potato mixture into the prepared casserole dish. Beat eggs and cream together in a bowl; add Gouda cheese and stir. Pour the egg mixture atop the sausage and potato mixture. Bake in preheated oven until the egg is set, about 25 minutes.
Blend soy milk, banana, blueberries, oats, chia seeds, vanilla extract, and white sugar together in a blender until smooth.
Heat oven to 375 degrees F. Spray 12 regular-size muffin cups with cooking spray. In 10-inch skillet, cook sausage and onion over medium-high heat 5 to 7 minutes, stirring frequently, until sausage is no longer pink; drain. Cool 5 minutes; stir in mushrooms, salt, sage and cheese. In medium bowl, stir baking mixture ingredients with whisk or fork until blended. Spoon 1 scant tablespoon baking mixture into each muffin cup. Top with about 1/4 cup sausage mixture. Spoon 1 tablespoon baking mixture onto sausage mixture in each muffin cup. Bake about 30 minutes or until toothpick inserted in center comes out clean, and tops of muffins are golden brown. Cool 5 minutes. With thin knife, loosen sides of pies from pan; remove from pan and place top sides up on cooling rack. Cool 10 minutes longer, and serve.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Stir 3 tablespoons honey, the lemon juice, 1/4 teaspoon cinnamon, and 1/4 teaspoon ginger together in a small bowl; spread evenly into the bottom of the prepared baking dish. Arrange the sliced pears in 2 rows. Beat the eggs, milk, 1 tablespoon honey, 1/4 teaspoon cinnamon, and 1/4 teaspoon ginger together in a shallow dish; soak each piece of bread in the egg mixture and arrange atop the pears. Bake in the preheated oven until the bread is set and golden brown, about 20 minutes. To serve, cut into squares and use a thin, flat spatula to lift each portion out of the pan and turn pear side up. Sprinkle with toasted almonds and drizzle with any syrup left in the baking dish.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Melt the butter in a 2-quart casserole, and place the frozen blintzes on top of the butter in a single layer. Mix the eggs, sour cream, sugar, salt, vanilla extract, and orange juice in a bowl until thoroughly combined, and pour the mixture over the blintzes. Bake in the preheated oven until the top is lightly browned, and a toothpick inserted into the center of the casserole comes out clean, about 45 minutes.
Preheat an oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease and flour a 9-inch round baking dish. In a large bowl, cut together the self-rising flour, sugar, and butter with a pastry cutter until the mixture resembles coarse crumbs. Stir in the raisins. In a separate bowl, whisk together egg with 1 cup of milk. Lightly mix the milk mixture into the flour mixture until it holds together. Place dough in prepared baking dish, and brush top with 1 tablespoon of milk for a nice golden brown crust. Place the bread into the preheated oven. Reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C), and bake for 1 hour. Let cool before serving.
Stir the cream cheese, almonds, brown sugar, and lemon juice together in a bowl until the mixture is soft and thoroughly combined; spread over one side of each bread slice. Place 1/4 of the blueberries onto a bread slice; press down on the berries to keep them from rolling off. Top the blueberries with a cream cheese-spread slice. Repeat 3 more times with remaining berries to make 4 blueberry sandwiches. Beat the eggs, milk, vanilla extract, and cinnamon together in a bowl until blended. Spray a skillet with cooking spray and heat over medium-low heat. Dip each blueberry sandwich into the egg mixture on both sides; fry in the prepared skillet until golden brown, about 3 minutes per side.
Heat the vegetable oil in a skillet over medium heat. Stir in the garlic and onion; cook and stir until the onion has softened and turned translucent, about 5 minutes. Stir in zucchini; cook and stir for 5 minutes. Mix in the crushed tomatoes and hot pepper sauce. Cover and simmer for 10 minutes. Make 4 wells in the tomato mixture, and crack the eggs into each well. Do not stir. Cover and cook until eggs are desired consistency, about 3 minutes for soft yolks. Carefully remove the eggs from the skillet and serve with the tomato sauce.
Blend the oatmeal, cottage cheese, and egg whites in a blender until smooth; add water as needed to keep the mixture moving. Add the garlic, Italian seasoning, cayenne pepper, salt, and black pepper; blend to combine. Prepare a saucepan with cooking spray and place over medium heat; cook the mushrooms in the hot pan until tender, 5 to 7 minutes; set aside. Prepare a large skillet with cooking spray and place over medium-high heat; cook the cottage cheese mixture in the hot skillet until bubbles begin to form on the top. Flip the pancake and cook until browned on the bottom; remove from heat. Spread the mushrooms over one half of the pancake; top the mushrooms with the spinach, Canadian bacon, and feta cheese. Fold the other half of the pancake over the fillings like you would an omelet.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Spray 24 miniature muffin cups with cooking spray. Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat and cook onion until softened, about 2 minutes. Stir spinach into onion and cook, stirring often, until spinach is wilted and onions are translucent, about 3 more minutes. Drain juice. Beat eggs with milk in a large bowl until thoroughly combined; stir in Cheddar, Asiago, and Parmesan cheeses and season with salt and black pepper. Divide spinach mixture into the prepared muffin cups (about 1 teaspoon per cup) and top spinach with imitation crab meat. Slowly and carefully pour egg-cheese mixture over the imitation crab, filling the mini muffin cups just to the top. Bake in the preheated oven until the egg is set, 12 to 15 minutes.
Place a steamer insert into a saucepan and fill with water to just below the bottom of the steamer. Cover pan and bring the water to a boil. Add asparagus, cover, and steam until just tender, 2 to 6 minutes depending on thickness. Fill a large saucepan with 2 to 3 inches of water and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to medium-low, pour in the vinegar, and keep the water at a gentle simmer. Stir in salt until dissolved. Crack an egg into a small bowl and gently slip the egg into the simmering water, holding the bowl just above the surface of the water. Repeat with the remaining eggs. Poach the eggs until the whites are firm and the yolks have thickened but are not hard, 3 to 5  minutes. Remove the eggs from the water with a slotted spoon, drain on plate lined with kitchen towels to remove excess water, then place onto a warm plate. Preheat the oven's broiler and set the oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source. Arrange croissant halves on a baking sheet. Top each with 1 poached egg, 1 slice Canadian bacon, 3 spears asparagus, and 1/4 cup Asiago cheese. Broil in preheated oven until cheese is melted and beginning to crisp, 2 to 3 minutes. Heat hollandaise sauce in a saucepan over medium heat until bubbly and hot, about 5 minutes. Serve sauce poured over baked croissants.
In a large bowl combine the ground ham, onion, broccoli and beaten eggs. Mix with hands for 1 full minute, or until eggs are evenly absorbed into meat. Sprinkle anise seed, basil, garlic, salt, pepper, cornmeal and cheese over meat mixture and mix again with hands for 1 full minute, until all ingredients are evenly distributed. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Scoop about 3 ounces of ham mixture into hands and form patties about 1/2 inch thick. Lay patties in skillet and cook for 3 to 5 minutes each side, or until browned. Drain on paper towels. Repeat until all of the mixture has been used, then serve hot.
Place all ingredients into bread machine in the proper order for your machine.  Use the Dough cycle. At end of the Dough cycle, remove dough from the machine.  Place on a lightly floured board, and let it rest, covered, for about 10 minutes. Shape dough into a loaf, and place it in a 9 x 5 inch greased bread pan.  Cover, and let rise for 45 minutes. Just before baking, brush the top of the dough with a little milk, and slash a line down the center.  Bake at 375 degrees F (190 degrees C) for 30 to 35 minutes.  Remove from pan, and cool on a wire rack.
Lightly grease a 9 x 5 inch glass loaf pan, and line with greased waxed paper.  Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 Degrees C). In a large bowl, cream together butter or margarine, sugar, and almond extract.  Separate eggs, and beat in egg yolks one at a time until light and fluffy.  Sift flour, baking powder and soda into creamed mixture, and mix thoroughly. Stir in 1/4 cup strawberry juice. Fold in strawberries. In another bowl, beat egg whites until stiff.  Fold into strawberry batter. Turn batter into prepared pan.  Lightly drop pan to pop any air bubbles. Bake for 50 to 60 minutes, or until tester inserted in the center comes out clean.  Cool for 15 minutes in the pan, and then cool completely on a wire rack before slicing.
Combine sour cream, lemon juice and mustard in a bowl.  Add ham, cheese, almonds, grapes and onions.  Toss lightly to coat. Divide ham mixture evenly between pita pockets.  You may eat these as is or heat them briefly.  If you choose to heat them, do two halves at a time in the microwave for 1 minute.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Lay the ham, green pepper and onion in the bottom of a shallow greased baking pan. Whisk the milk, flour, eggs and curry together until smooth. Pour milk mixture over the ham mixture. Bake for 35-40 minutes or till puffed, crisp, and nicely browned.
Beat together egg substitute, milk, vanilla and cinnamon. Dip bread slices in egg mixture until both sides are soaked. Spray a skillet or frying pan with cooking spray and heat over medium high heat. Place bread slices into pan and cook until golden brown on both sides
In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs and herb seasoning blend. Place a lightly greased skillet over medium-high heat.  When hot, pour the egg mixture in, and turn the skillet to coat evenly. Cook until almost done, then flip over. Spread the top with horseradish and sprinkle with Cheddar and Parmesan cheeses. Continue to cook until the bottom is no longer raw. Fold in half and transfer to a plate for serving.
Place potatoes in a large bowl, cover with cold  water, and refrigerate for 30 minutes or so. Drain, pat dry, and season with salt. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Saute bell pepper, poblano pepper, and onion in  butter until soft. Remove from pan, and set aside. Melt remaining 2 tablespoons butter and bacon fat  in pan, and fry the potatoes until crisp and medium brown. Transfer to a plate lined with paper towels. Preheat oven to 225 degrees F (110 degrees C). Arrange the potatoes in a lightly-buttered, non-stick pan, preferably a deep, slope-sided skillet.  Arrange the onions and peppers over the potatoes, and then spread cheese over the top. In a mixing bowl, beat eggs with water, parsley, and salt and pepper; pour the mixture over the potatoes. Put the skillet in a larger pan with a half inch of water in it. Bake in preheated oven until eggs set, about 30 to 40 minutes. Remove the tortilla, let cool, and loosen edges from the pan. Put a serving plate over the skillet, and flip the tortilla over onto the plate. Cut into small pie-shape wedges. Refrigerate until ready to serve; reheat if desired.
Combine the rice and water in a saucepan and bring to a boil. Reduce heat to low, cover, and simmer for 15 minutes or until rice is tender and water is absorbed. Meanwhile, heat a non-stick skillet over medium heat until hot. Fry Spam(TM) slices until browned. Remove from the skillet, and set aside. Pour the eggs into the skillet; cook and stir until scrambled and cooked through. Set aside. For each plate, place two scoops of rice, two scrambled eggs, and two slices of spam. Top with brown gravy.
Heat 2 tablespoons oil over low heat in a 12-inch non-stick skillet (so potatoes don't stick). While skillet heats, prepare onion, bell pepper, and chicken. A few minutes before cooking, increase heat to medium-high. When oil starts to send up wisps of smoke, add onion, pepper and chicken; cook, stirring often, until golden 7 to 8 minutes. Meanwhile, dice potatoes and toss with remaining oil. Transfer chicken mixture to a bowl and reserve. Add potatoes to empty skillet; cook, stirring only occasionally so they form a golden-brown crust, about 10 minutes. As potatoes cook, mix ketchup, mustard, chili powder, chopped fresh cilantro, and 2 tablespoons of water. (Recipe can be prepared to this point up to 2 hours ahead. Spread hot potatoes on a large lipped cookie sheet; cover when cool. Return skillet to medium-high; add potatoes and re-crisp.) Return reserved chicken mixture to skillet; stir in ketchup mixture, then season with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring frequently, until hash has nicely browned, about 5 minutes longer.
In a saucepan, combine the oats, water, salt, sugar, bananas and cinnamon. Bring to a boil, then reduce heat to low, and simmer until the liquid has been absorbed, stirring frequently. Pour into bowls, and top each with a splash of cold milk.
Place the peaches, ice, nutmeg, vanilla extract, honey, wheat germ, oats, and soy milk into a blender. Cover, and puree until smooth. Pour into glasses to serve.
Place the potatoes in a large pot. Cover the potatoes with water. Bring the water to a boil over medium-high heat. Cook the potatoes until tender enough to pierce with a fork, about 15 minutes; drain and refrigerate potatoes overnight. Peel and grate the potatoes into a large bowl. Melt the butter in a skillet over medium heat; add the grated potatoes; season with salt. Press the potatoes into a round loaf using a spatula. Sprinkle the milk over them. Cover the skillet with a lid. When you hear the potatoes begin to sizzle in about 5 to 10 minutes, reduce the heat to low. Cook until a brown crust has formed on the bottom, about 30 minutes. Cover the skillet with a large plate and flip the roesti onto the plate to serve.
Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F (220 degrees C). Press the puff pastry into the bottom and up the sides of a shallow casserole dish or 8 inch pie plate. In a small bowl, beat eggs and milk with a fork until blended. Season with salt and pepper. Sprinkle a thin layer of Swiss cheese in the bottom of the pastry crust. Sprinkle crumbled bacon over the cheese. Pour the egg mixture into the pastry and sprinkle with the rest of the cheese. Arrange slices of tomato on top. Bake in the preheated oven for 20 minutes. Reduce the oven temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Continue to bake for an additional 30 minutes, or until crust is browned.
Place potatoes in a saucepan covered by lightly salted water. Bring to a boil over high heat, then reduce heat to medium, and simmer until tender, 10 to 15 minutes.  Drain and allow to cool, then cut into 1/4-inch slices. Melt the butter in a skillet over medium heat. Cook the bacon strips in the butter until browned, 5 to 7 minutes; remove bacon and set aside.  Add the potatoes to the bacon fat and cook over medium-high heat until browned, about 5 minutes. Beat the eggs with the salt and pepper.  Pour the egg mixture into the skillet, and mix with the potatoes and bacon; allow to cook until eggs are set, 3 to 5 minutes, turning once.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Prepare two cookie sheets with cooking spray. In a large bowl, combine oats, wheat germ, almonds, cinnamon and nutmeg.  In a separate bowl, mix apple juice, molasses and extract.  Pour the wet ingredients into the dry ingredients, stirring to coat. Spread mixture onto baking sheets. Bake for 30 minutes in preheated oven, stirring mixture every 10 to 15 minutes, or until granola has a golden brown color.  Let cool. Stir in dried fruit.  Store in an airtight container.
Pour milk into a steaming pitcher and heat to 145 degrees F to 165 degrees F (65 to 70 degrees C) using the steaming wand. Measure the chocolate syrup into a large coffee mug. Brew espresso, then add to mug. Pour the steamed milk into the mug, using a spoon to hold back the foam. Top with whipped cream.
Heat oven to 350 degrees F.  Spray 8 or 9-inch square baking dish with nonstick cooking spray.  In 10-inch skillet cook sausage and green pepper over medium-high heat 8 to 10 minutes or until sausage is browned and cooked through; drain. Place half of the Simply Potatoes in prepared baking dish. Top with half of the sausage and 3/4 cup of cheese; repeat. Combine eggs and milk in medium bowl; beat well with fork.  Pour egg mixture evenly over layered mixture in pan.  Cover with foil; bake for 45 minutes.  Uncover; add chopped tomato and remaining 1/2 cup cheese.  Bake, uncovered, for an additional 10 to 15 minutes or until knife inserted in center comes out clean. Let stand 10 minutes before serving.
Melt butter in a large nonstick skillet over medium-high heat. Stir in mushrooms, and cook until tender, about 5 minutes. Using a slotted spoon, transfer mushrooms to plate. Remove skillet from heat. In a small bowl, beat egg yolks and milk to blend. In a separate bowl, beat egg whites with a dry beater until soft peaks form. Fold yolk mixture into whites. Return skillet to medium-high heat. When butter sizzles, pour egg mixture into skillet. Sprinkle mushrooms and crab meat evenly over the top. Cook until omelet begins to set, about 3 minutes. Sprinkle with Swiss cheese. Using a large spatula, fold omelet over, forming semicircle. Cover skillet; cook until omelet puffs and is cooked through, about 3 minutes. Slide omelet onto large plate.
Place cranberry juice, banana, orange, strawberries, sherbet, ice, and protein powder in the bowl of a blender.  Blend on high speed until smooth, about one minute.  Adjust the consistency by adding more sherbet if it's too thin, or more cranberry juice if it's too thick. Pour into two glasses and use a straw!
Mix together the grapefruit soda and grape juice in a large bowl. Serve in champagne or punch glasses.
Preheat an oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a 9x13 inch baking pan. In a large skillet over medium heat, cook and stir the sausage, onion, and jalapeno until the sausage is well browned, about 10 minutes. Drain; set aside to cool slightly. Stir together the Swiss cheese, Parmesan cheese, egg, hot sauce, and milk in a large bowl. Stir in the biscuit mix, margarine, salt, and parsley. Add the sausage mixture; stir until well combined. Pour the mixture into the prepared pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 35 minutes. Serve warm or cold.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). In a medium bowl, stir together chicken, cheese, onion, flour, and 1/4 cup pecans; spoon into pie crust.  In another bowl, beat eggs with milk and mustard; pour over chicken. Top with remaining pecans. Bake in preheated oven for 50 minutes, or until done.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. In a large bowl, combine green bell pepper, red bell pepper, onion, corn, peas and green beans; season with salt and pepper. Stir in cottage cheese and egg whites. Pour into prepared baking dish. Sprinkle on ham and green onion. Top with cheese. Bake in preheated oven until center is set, about 40 to 60 minutes.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Spread shredded cheese in the bottom of pie crust. In a large bowl, combine eggs, cream and milk. Season with hot sauce, salt, pepper and paprika.  Pour filling over shredded cheese in the pie crust. Bake in the preheated oven for 40 to 50 minutes, or until golden brown. Cool 10 minutes before serving.
In a large skillet or frying pan, melt butter over medium heat. Add apples and saute until tender but not completely cooked. Heat a lightly oiled omelet pan or medium sized skillet. Whisk together eggs, cream, salt, pepper and sugar. Pour egg mixture into omelet pan. When bottom of omelet has begun to set, place half of the apple mixture on top of the eggs. When bottom of omelet is completely cooked, fold over omelet, cover and cook through. Serve warm with remaining apples on top or on the side.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Brush crust with melted butter. Sprinkle bacon inside crust. Place zucchini, eggs and cream in a blender; puree until smooth. Pour zucchini mixture into a bowl and stir in marjoram, onion salt, pepper, and cayenne. Fold in cheese and pour mixture into pie crust. Bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes. Reduce heat to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C) and bake for an additional 45 minutes, or until set.
Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. In a large bowl, Combine the bread cubes and milk.  Drain after 5 minutes. In a separate bowl, beat together  milk, eggs, salt and pepper. In a large skillet or saucepan, melt 1/4 cup butter over medium heat. Add the egg mixture and scramble until soft.  Do not fully cook. Add the soaked bread cubes and turn into a greased 9x13 inch baking pan. Sprinkle shredded cheese on top of casserole. In a small bowl, stir together butter and bread crumbs. Sprinkle this mixture over the cheese and then top with the bacon. Cover and refrigerate overnight. The next morning, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in preheated oven for 40 minutes. Serve warm.
In a large bowl, dissolve yeast and a pinch of sugar in warm water.  Set aside to rest for about 5 minutes. Mix butter or margarine and molasses into yeast.  Add 1 cup oat bran, 2 cups flour, and salt.  Stir, and add flour as needed to make dough stick together.  When dough forms a ball, turn out onto a lightly floured surface.  Knead for 8 to 10 minutes, adding flour as needed to make a slightly sticky and moist dough.  Place in a buttered bowl, and turn to coat the surface.  Cover with a damp cloth, and let rise until doubled in bulk, about 1 1/2 to 2 hours. Punch down, and form into two round or oval loaves.  Place on a greased baking sheet, and allow to rise 1 hour, or until loaves have doubled in size.  Sprinkle 1 tablespoon oat bran on top of the loaves. Bake in a preheated 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) oven  for 35 to 45 minutes, or until the tops are a nice dark brown and the bottoms of the loaves sound hollow when tapped.
Place ingredients in the pan of the bread machine in the order suggested by the manufacturer. Start.
Arrange dinner rolls in a tube pan. Scatter margarine pieces evenly over rolls. Mix pudding mix, brown sugar, and cinnamon in a bowl; pour over rolls. Place a towel over tube pan and all dough to rise overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Pour milk over risen dough, allowing milk to seep through any gaps. Bake in preheated oven until golden brown, 20 to 23 minutes. Allow bread to rest for 5 minutes. Invert pan onto a baking sheet or large plate to serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Crumble pork sausage into a large skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir until no longer pink, 7 to 10 minutes. Drain and discard any excess grease. Return skillet to heat; add cream of chicken soup, French onion dip, green bell pepper, red bell pepper, and onion. Fold hash brown potatoes and 1 cup Cheddar cheese into the mixture; bring to a simmer. Transfer sausage mixture to a 9x11-inch casserole dish; top with 1 cup Cheddar cheese. Cover dish with aluminum foil. Bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes. Remove foil and continue baking until beginning to brown around the edges, about 15 minutes more.
Place egg yolks into a large mixing bowl with the sugar, and beat until light and frothy. Mix in the vanilla sugar and water until evenly combined, and stir in half the melted butter, half the buttermilk, half the flour. When mixture is smooth, mix in remaining butter, buttermilk, flour, cardamom, and salt, and beat again to a smooth batter. In a separate bowl, beat the egg whites with an electric mixer until they form stiff peaks; gently fold the egg whites into the batter, incorporating as much volume as possible. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's directions. Spoon about 1/3 cup of batter into the preheated waffle iron, close the lid, and cook until the waffle is golden brown, about 5 minutes. Remove waffle to a plate. If using a heart-shaped iron, break the waffle into individual hearts to serve. Repeat with remaining batter.
Butter a 9x13-inch baking dish. Lay the bread slices into the prepared baking dish in 2 layers. Beat eggs, half-and-half cream, orange juice, white sugar, brown sugar, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a bowl until smooth, and pour over the bread. With a large spoon, press the bread down into the egg mixture so all the bread becomes soaked with the mixture. Sprinkle the granola evenly over the casserole, and drizzle with maple syrup and melted butter. Cover the dish with plastic wrap, and refrigerate overnight. About 1 hour before serving, remove the casserole from the refrigerator, and take off the plastic wrap. Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven for 30 minutes, then turn oven temperature up to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake the casserole until browned, about 15 more minutes. Serve warm.
Put banana, ice, oats, yogurt, skim milk, peanut butter, honey, and cinnamon, respectively, in a blender; blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Prepare a 13x9-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Beat eggs, milk, sour cream, and salt together in a large bowl with wire whisk until well blended. Mix ham, bell peppers, mushrooms, and green onion into the egg mixture; pour into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, about 50 minutes. Cover top of dish with Cheddar cheese; continue baking until cheese is melted, about 3 minutes.
Spray the bottom of the inside of a slow cooker crock with cooking spray to coat. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Spread hash-brown potatoes into the bottom of the slow cooker crock to cover. Top with cooked sausage. Sprinkle mozzarella cheese over the sausage and stir. Beat eggs in a large bowl until smooth; add milk and beat to integrate. Stir mustard, salt, and pepper into the egg mixture; stream over the potato mixture. Cook on Low for 6 to 8 hours.
Whisk flour, cornmeal, brown sugar, baking powder, salt, cinnamon, and cloves together in a large bowl. Beat milk, pumpkin, eggs, 2 tablespoon vegetable oil, and vanilla extract together in another bowl. Add milk mixture to flour mixture and stir until batter is well-combined. Heat about 1 tablespoon oil in a griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Stir milk, buckwheat, almond flour, vegetable oil, eggs, baking powder, sugar, and salt together in a bowl until batter is smooth. Working in batches, ladle batter into preheated waffle iron and cook until waffles are golden and crisp, 3 to 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place squash on a baking sheet, cut-side down. Bake in the preheated oven until the outer shell of squash is tender, about 45 minutes. Scoop fibers and seeds out of squash and discard. Shred the tender squash meat with a fork; measure 3 cups and place in a bowl. Heat olive oil in a saucepan over medium heat; saute onion and garlic until onion is transparent, 5 to 10 minutes. Add spinach, black pepper, and oregano; cook and stir until heated through, about 3 minutes. Add spinach mixture to squash. Whisk eggs together in a bowl; add milk and whisk until frothy. Pour egg mixture over squash mixture; mix well. Spray a 9-inch pie pan with cooking spray. Sprinkle bread crumbs into prepared pie pan. Pour squash-egg mixture over bread crumbs. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center of the quiche comes out clean, about 45 minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Mix flour, oats, sugar, baking powder, and salt in a large bowl. Beat egg yolks in another bowl, reserving egg whites in a third bowl. Add buttermilk, milk, and melted butter to egg yolks; beat until well mixed. Pour buttermilk mixture into flour mixture; beat until batter is blended. Beat egg whites and vanilla extract in a glass or metal bowl until soft peaks form. Fold half the egg whites into the buttermilk batter until egg whites are incorporated; repeat with remaining half. Ladle batter into preheated waffle iron. Cook until waffles are golden and crisp, about 5 minutes. Transfer waffle to a paper towel-lined plate to prevent sogginess and repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Prepare 12 muffin cups with cooking spray. Whisk egg whites, eggs, and half-and-half together in a bowl. Stir zucchini, green onion, and cheese into the egg mixture; pour into prepared muffin cups. Bake in preheated oven until set in the middle, 30 to 35 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Coat 12 muffin cups with nonstick spray. In a large bowl, combine sausage, potatoes, cheese, red pepper, green onion, chopped oregano, salt, and black pepper. Divide mixture among the prepared muffin cups. In a medium bowl, whisk together eggs and milk to combine. Slowly pour egg mixture over sausage mixture in the muffin cups. Cups will be full. Bake in preheated oven for 20 to 25 minutes or until puffed and set. Remove and let cool in cups on a wire rack for 10 minutes. Loosen sides and remove from cups. Serve warm, garnished with additional oregano, if desired.
Beat eggs until just combined; do not over-beat. Melt butter in a skillet over high heat. Add ham, onion, and bell pepper. Sprinkle in a nice pinch of salt and a touch of pepper. Cook and stir over medium-high heat until onions start to soften and ham begins to caramelize, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to medium-low and pour in the eggs. Mix briefly with a spatula while shaking the pan to ensure ingredients are evenly distributed. Quickly run the spatula along the edges of the omelet. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese and cayenne pepper over the omelet. Cook, shaking the pan occasionally, until the top is still wet but not runny, about 5 minutes. Fold omelet in half with your spatula and transfer to a plate.
Place banana, berries, kale, orange juice, water, yogurt, and almonds into a blender. Cover and puree until smooth, 20 to 30 seconds.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Mix oats, milk, eggs, applesauce, brown sugar, butter, white sugar, baking powder, cinnamon, and vanilla extract together in a bowl until oats are evenly moistened; pour into prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until set and just golden brown, 20 to 30 minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions and lightly grease. Mix corn muffin mix, milk, egg, and butter together in a bowl until smooth; fold in bacon, pepperjack cheese, Cheddar cheese, and green chile peppers. Spoon batter into preheated waffle iron and cook according to manufacturer's instructions until golden brown, 5 to 10 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F ( 190 degrees C). Place paper liners in 12 muffin tin cups. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Remove casings from sausages (if not packaged in bulk) and place in skillet. Break the sausage into small pieces with a wooden spoon as it cooks. Cook until the sausage is crumbly and thoroughly cooked, about 7 minutes. Add bell pepper; cook for about 2 minutes. Remove skillet from heat. Push sausage mixture to one side of the pan and blot up some of the rendered fat with wadded paper towels leaving about 1 tablespoon. Let mixture cool. Place flour, corn meal, baking soda, and cayenne pepper in a mixing bowl. Whisk until combined. In a separate bowl, whisk eggs and buttermilk together. Add egg/buttermilk mixture slowly to flour/cornmeal mixture. Add fresh corn kernels, green onions, Cheddar cheese, and reserved sausage mixture. Stir in melted butter; mix just until flour is mixed in. Divide batter among cups in prepared muffin pan. Top with a few shreds of Cheddar cheese. Bake until golden brown and a toothpick inserted into a muffin comes out clean, 25 to 30 minutes. Let cool to warm before serving.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Break each piece in half. Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat. Whisk milk, egg, and nutmeg together in a shallow bowl. Dip each bread slice in the egg mixture. Cook dipped bread slices in the hot oil until French toast is lightly browned, 2 to 3 minute per side. Transfer French toast to a work surface and turn heat  under skillet to medium-low. Spread cranberry sauce over 1 French toast piece and top with turkey, provolone cheese, and bacon. Spread mustard on the other French toast piece and top with ham; lay on top of bacon layer, ham-side down, creating a sandwich. Cook sandwich in the skillet until cheese is melted and sandwich is heated through, 3 to 4 minutes per side.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Spray 12-cup muffin tin with cooking spray. Beat eggs until thoroughly combined. Stir in cottage cheese, diced green chilies, green onions, sweet bell peppers, salt and pepper. Stir to combine. Pour mixture into prepared muffin tin. Bake in preheated oven until set, 15 to 20 minutes. Loosen muffins from the muffin tin while still hot.
Beat eggs in a large bowl; add milk, flour, sugar, 1 tablespoon vegetable oil, and vanilla extract and mix until batter is very thin. Heat a griddle or a Swedish plett pan over medium heat; add about 1 teaspoon oil. Pour a small amount of batter onto the griddle and tip griddle to spread the batter into a thin layer; cook until lightly browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip pancake and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes more. Roll pancake and place on a plate. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Place bacon slices one next to the other on the prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 to 20 minutes. Remove from oven. Flip bacon slices with kitchen tongs and return to oven. Bake until crispy, 15 to 20 minutes more. Thinner slices will need less time, about 20 minutes total. Drain on a plate lined with paper towels.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Line a muffin tin with paper liners. Mix flour, raisins, 1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar, caraway seeds, baking powder, salt, and baking soda in a large bowl. Whisk buttermilk and egg together in a small bowl. Stir into flour mixture. Fold butter into the batter. Spoon batter into the prepared muffin tin. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 20 to 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Press pie crust into a 9-inch pie dish. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion in the hot oil until softened, 5 to 10 minutes. Whisk eggs, milk, and mayonnaise together in a bowl until evenly mixed; stir sausage, onion, pepperjack cheese, mushrooms, and garlic into egg mixture. Pour mixture into the prepared pie crust; top with Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center of the quiche comes out clean, about 45 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour a large loaf pan. Combine flour, salt, and baking powder in a bowl. Beat 2 1/4 cups sugar, vegetable oil, and eggs in another bowl until smooth. Stir milk, poppy seeds, 1 1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract, 1 1/2 teaspoon almond extract, and 1 1/2 teaspoon butter extract into egg mixture. Add flour mixture; mix until batter is just moistened. Pour batter into prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 50 to 60 minutes. Whisk 3/4 cup sugar, orange juice, 1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract, 1/2 teaspoon almond extract, and 1/2 teaspoon butter extract in a bowl until smooth. Pour orange juice glaze over hot poppy seed loaf.
Place rolled oats into a food processor and grind to flour. Place sweet potato into a large pot and cover with salted water; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low and simmer until very soft, about 20 minutes. Drain. Blend sweet potato, eggs, banana, and milk in a blender until smooth; pour batter into a large bowl. Stir protein powder and ground oats into batter. Heat vegetable oil in a skillet over low heat. Drop batter, about 1/4 cup per pancake, into the skillet, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 3 to 4 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 500 degrees F. Arrange tomato halves, cut sides up on a foil-lined baking pan. Sprinkle tomatoes with salt, sugar and parsley, then drizzle with olive oil. Roast tomatoes until soft but still intact, 30 to 40 minutes. In food processor, combine avocados, lime juice, water, olive oil, salt and pepper; process until smooth. In medium bowl, combine avocado sauce; stir in chives or scallions. Separate English muffin halves and brush with olive oil; bake in preheated oven until edges are brown, about 8 minutes. While muffins are cooking, fill a 12-inch heavy skillet with water until half-full; bring water to a simmer, then add vinegar. Break an egg into a small cup, then carefully pour the egg into the water. Repeat with remaining eggs, poach eggs at a simmer for 3 to 4 minutes or until whites are firm but yolks are still runny. To drain, transfer eggs with a slotted spoon to paper towels and sprinkle with salt and pepper. To assemble, place roasted tomatoes on top of English muffins. Top each tomato with an egg, then transfer muffins to 4 plates. Spoon avocado sauce over eggs and sprinkle with crumbled bacon.
Preheat and lightly grease a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Whisk cornmeal, flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, and paprika together in a bowl. Stir buttermilk, butter, and egg together in a separate bowl; stir into flour mixture until batter is just blended. Ladle 1/2 to 3/4 cup batter into the preheated waffle iron; cook waffle according to manufacturers' instructions until golden brown, about 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Stir sweet potato, milk, egg, and butter together in a bowl. Whisk flour, brown sugar, baking powder, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, nutmeg, ginger, cloves, and salt together in a separate large bowl. Add potato mixture to flour mixture; stir until batter is just combined. Ladle batter into the preheated waffle iron and cook until waffles are golden and crisp, about 3 minutes. Stir maple syrup, cranberry sauce, and 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon together in a saucepan over medium heat. Cook, stirring occasionally, until well-combined and heated through, 5 to 10 minutes. Pour syrup over cooked waffles.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Cook and stir bacon and sausage in a large skillet and over medium-high heat until evenly browned and bacon is crisp, about 10 minutes; drain on a paper towel-lined plate. Brush butter on the bottom and sides of a 9x13-inch baking dish. Sprinkle Parmesan cheese into the bottom of the baking dish and top with bacon and sausage. Spread Cheddar cheese over bacon and sausage. Beat cream, eggs, and half-and-half together in a bowl. Slowly pour egg mixture over cheese and sausage into the baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center of the quiche comes out clean, about 1 hour. Cool for 10 minutes before slicing.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place the sausage into a deep, heavy skillet over medium heat, and cook and stir until the sausage is browned and crumbly, about 15 minutes. Drain excess grease, and mix the sausage with the cream of mushroom soup and water. Bring to a boil, reduce heat to a simmer, and cook until the gravy has thickened, about 15 minutes. While gravy is simmering, pop open the can of biscuit dough, and gently separate biscuits. Place them onto a an ungreased baking sheet about 2 inches apart. Bake biscuits until golden brown, 13 to 17 minutes; split the biscuits in half, place onto serving plates, and ladle gravy over biscuits to serve.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 9x5-inch loaf pan with cooking spray. Combine flour, salt, baking soda, cinnamon, pumpkin pie spice, and nutmeg in a bowl; set aside. Beat the sugar, canola oil, whole eggs, egg white, pumpkin beer, and pumpkin puree together in a large bowl until smooth. Combine chia seeds and water in a small bowl, then whisk in the chia seed mixture into the pumpkin mixture until smooth and well-blended. Gradually stir in the flour mixture into the pumpkin mixture. Mix until smooth. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan, and layer the chopped walnuts on top. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, about 50 minutes. Cool in the pans for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Grind the basmati rice in a coffee grinder until it resembles a coarse powder. Empty the ground rice into a bowl. Repeat the process with the quinoa, millet, buckwheat, sesame seeds, and flax seeds. Stir in the cornmeal and amaranth. Store in an air tight container in the refrigerator until ready to cook.
Combine 1 cup flour, undissolved yeast and salt in a large bowl.  Heat water and oil until very warm (120 degrees  to 130 degrees F).  Add to flour mixture and beat for 2 minutes.  Add enough remaining flour to make a soft dough.  Knead until smooth and elastic, about 5 minutes.  (If using RapidRise yeast, let dough rest at this point for 10 minutes.) Roll dough to 12-inch circle; place in greased pizza pan. OR, pat dough with floured hands, pressing gently to fill greased pizza pan or baking sheet.  Form a rim by pinching the edge of the dough; prick surface with fork. Bake crust in preheated 450 degrees F oven on lowest oven rack for 8 minutes.  Reduce oven to 375 degrees F.  Remove pizza from oven. Top pizza crust with sausage, hash browns and onions.  Beat eggs, ground mustard, pepper and salt together in a bowl.  Pour over toppings.  Sprinkle with cheese.  Bake for 16 to 20 minutes until eggs are set and crust is browned.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Whisk eggs, sour cream, milk, butter, flour, salt, and black pepper in a bowl until thoroughly combined; gently stir imitation crabmeat and Swiss cheese into the egg mixture. Spread the filling into the pie crust. Bake quiche in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the filling comes out clean, 40 to 45 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease the bottom of a 5x9-inch loaf pan. Beat white sugar and butter together in a large bowl with an electric mixer until light and fluffy. Add brown sugar and hot chocolate mix; stir well. Place bananas, peach, milk, eggs, and vanilla extract in a blender; blend until smooth. Stir into butter mixture until well incorporated. Mix flour, walnuts, baking soda, and salt together in a separate bowl; stir into banana-butter mixture until flour mixture is just moistened. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of bread comes out clean, 50 to 60 minutes. Cool in pan for 5 minutes before transferring bread to a wire rack to cool completely.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch pie dish. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add onion; cook and stir for 2 minutes. Add thyme, leeks, and mushrooms; cook and stir until the onions are cooked through, 5 to 8 minutes. Add sweet potato; cook and stir until the sweet potato is tender, about 15 minutes.  Place mixture in prepared pie dish. Combine eggs, sour cream, salt, and cream in a food processor; pulse until smooth. Pour into pie dish and stir slightly to distribute over onion mixture. Top with Asiago cheese. Bake in preheated oven until top is beginning to turn golden brown and center is gently firm, about 45-50 minutes. Let sit a few minutes before cutting. Serve warm.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Spray iron with cooking spray. Mix sorghum flour, tapioca starch, sugar, baking powder, xanthan gum, and salt in a large bowl. Beat chicken and duck egg whites until foamy in a large glass or metal mixing bowl until soft peaks form. Lift your beater or whisk straight up: the egg whites will form soft mounds rather than a sharp peak. Beat egg yolks, almond milk, applesauce, and vanilla extract together in a large bowl. Continue beating while gradually adding the flour mixture; blend until smooth. Fold the egg whites into the batter. Pour 2/3 cup batter onto preheated waffle iron. Cook until golden brown.
Mix flour, 1 cup milk, and eggs together in a large bowl. Stir butter, sugar, and vanilla extract into flour mixture until smooth. Add remaining 1 cup milk; mix until just blended. Heat a cast iron crepe pan over medium heat; spray surface with cooking spray. Pour a thin and even layer of batter onto the heated pan; fry for 30 to 60 seconds on each side. Repeat with remaining batter, spraying the pan between each batch.
Beat eggs in a small bowl. Set aside. Combine tortilla slices and chorizo in a skillet over medium heat. Cook, stirring, until tortillas are crisped, 5 minutes. Place cheese slices on top of chorizo and tortillas; pour in eggs. Reduce heat to low and cook, stirring, until eggs are cooked through, 3 minutes. Season with salt and pepper to taste; garnish with chives.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease a 2-quart baking dish. Bring milk to a boil in a saucepan over medium-high heat. Stir in grits. Reduce heat to medium-low and simmer until the grits are thick, stirring often, about 5 minutes. Stir ham, Cheddar cheese, eggs, green onion, parsley, garlic powder, salt, and black pepper into grits. Transfer grit mixture to the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until set, about 25 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease one 8x4 inch loaf pan. Cream the butter or margarine, vanilla flavored sugar and eggs together. Add the coconut flavoring and mix well. Mix in the self-rising flour alternately with the sour cream to the creamed mixture. Stir in the flaked coconut. Pour the batter into the prepared pan. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 50 minutes. Pour glaze over hot loaf and serve. To Make  Glaze: Mix the confectioner's sugar and milk together until smooth.
Boil water, sugar, oil, salt, orange rind, caraway seeds, and fennel seeds in a saucepan for 3 minutes.  Cool until warm In a large bowl, whisk together 3 cups flour and yeast.  Stir in cooled orange rind mixture.  Beat with an electric mixer on medium speed for 2 minutes.  Blend in eggs.  Add 1 cup flour, and beat 1 minute on medium speed.  Add rye flour and enough additional white flour to make a stiff dough. Turn dough onto a lightly floured surface.  Knead for 8 to 10 minutes, or until smooth and satiny.  Shape into a ball.  Place in lightly greased bowl, turning to grease  the surface.  Cover with a damp cloth, and place in a warm spot.  Allow to rise for 1 1/2 hours, or until doubled. Punch dough down, and divide in half.  Shape into 2 balls.   Let rest for 10 min.  Shape into 2  loaves, and place into ungreased 9 x 5 inch loaf pans.  Brush with oil.  Allow to rise for 1 hour, or until doubled in size. Bake at 400 degrees F (205 degrees C) for 30 to 35 minutes, or until done.
Spread four slices of bread with peanut butter and jam. Cover with remaining four slices of bread. Beat together egg, milk, sugar and salt. In a large skillet or frying pan, melt butter over medium heat. Dip each sandwich into the egg mixture to coat it well and allow the excess to drip off. Place sandwiches in pan and cook until golden on both sides. Serve warm.
Preheat oven to 250 degrees F (120 degrees C). Preheat waffle iron. In a bowl, mix the pancake mix and whole wheat flour. Form a well in the center, and pour in water, oil, and syrup. Stir until evenly moist. Stir in the milk, vanilla, and cinnamon. Fold in walnuts. Pour about 1/3 cup batter per waffle into the waffle iron, and cook 5 minutes, until done. Transfer waffles to a baking dish, and place in the preheated oven. Cook 5 minutes, or until crisp.
Prepare biscuits according to the directions on the package. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain, and set aside. Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add onion, jalapeno, green chile, salt, and pepper. Fry, stirring, until onions are soft. Whisk together the eggs and milk; pour into the skillet. Stir frequently until eggs are scrambled and cooked through. Split biscuits in half.  Place some of the scrambled egg mixture on the bottom half, criss-cross two slices of bacon over the eggs, then top with shredded Monterey Jack cheese. Place the other half of the biscuits on the top, and serve.
Liberally spray a medium saucepan with cooking spray. Repeat spraying while cooking as needed. Over medium heat, cook the garlic approximately 3 minutes. Stir in the mushrooms, and season with garlic salt. Cook until mushrooms are tender, about 3 minutes, and set aside. In the same saucepan, scramble eggs. Stir in the mushrooms, and continue to scramble until eggs are firm. Transfer 1/4 of the egg mixture into each tortilla. Top each with 1/2 cup cheese, 4 cherry tomatoes and 1/4 of the sprouts. Roll tortillas, and serve.
Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add zucchini; cook and stir until soft. Add the onion and bell pepper, and cook until tender, about 5 minutes. Make a clearing in the center of the skillet and pour in the eggs. Cook and stir to scramble. When the eggs are cooked, stir in the tomato sauce until everything is coated. Serve warm.
Beat the egg whites in a clean bowl until soft peaks form. Lift your beater or whisk straight up: the egg whites will form soft mounds rather than a sharp peak. Beat the egg yolks in a separate bowl until smooth; mix in the milk, sugar, salt, flour, and raisins until just moistened. Fold in the egg whites. Melt the butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Pour the batter into the skillet and cook until golden brown; flip and cook until set on the other side, about 1 minute. Tear the kaiserschmarren into pieces using two forks and continue cooking until golden brown, about 2 minutes. Sprinkle with confectioners' sugar to garnish and serve with applesauce.
Combine the hot cocoa mix, milk, ice cream, coffee, and ice in a blender; blend until smooth. Pour into a tall glass and garnish with whipped cream if desired.
Pour milk into a steaming pitcher and heat to 145 degrees F to 165 degrees F (65 to 70 degrees C) using the steaming wand. Measure the flavored syrup into a large coffee mug.  Brew espresso, then add to mug.  Pour the steamed milk into the mug, using a spoon to hold back the foam. Spoon foam over the top.
Form the bulk hot pork sausage into 5 patties. Heat a large skillet, and fry the patties over medium high heat. Remove the sausage from the skillet and drain on paper towels. Melt butter in a second large skillet, and toast the buns over medium heat until golden brown. Meanwhile, break the eggs into the same skillet used for frying the sausage; reduce the heat to medium-low. Cook until the white is completely set and the yolk thickens. Flip the eggs and continue cooking for another 30 seconds, or until the yolk is to the diners' preferences. Stack your toasted buns starting with the pickles and jalapeno slices on the bottom, then the cooked sausage patty, pepperjack cheese, fried egg, and onion. Cover with the top half of the bun. Enjoy as the cheese melts between the egg and the sausage.
Melt 1/4 cup butter in a small saucepan over medium heat. Gradually stir the flour into the butter. Add small portions of the cream and wine alternately, whisking after each addition to thicken before introducing the next amount. Season with salt, pepper, and nutmeg. Melt the cheese into the liquid in small amounts, stirring continually. Reduce heat to low and keep sauce warm until using. Place a large skillet over medium-high heat. Spread 1/2 teaspoon of butter on one side of each slice of bread; spread about 1/2 tablespoon of Dijon mustard on the opposite side of each slice. Assemble the sandwiches by placing four slices of bread, buttered side down, into the skillet. Top each slice of bread with two slices of ham folded to completely fit on the bread; spoon equal amounts of the cheese sauce over the ham, reserving some of the sauce for later. Place the remaining slices of bread, mustard side down, atop the ham and cheese. Grill the sandwiches on each side until the bread is an even, golden brown color. Spoon a little of the cheese sauce on top of each sandwich before serving. Garnish each sandwich with 1 teaspoon of parsley.
Combine water, cinnamon, prunes, and sugar substitute in a saucepan over medium heat; bring to a boil; stir in the oat bran and boil for 2 minutes.
Place the milk, yogurt, banana, instant oatmeal, sweetener, and ice cubes into a blender. Cover, and puree until smooth. Pour into glasses to serve.
Melt the ghee in a skillet over medium-low heat. Stir in the shallots, and cook until the shallots begin to soften, about 3 minutes. Season with the curry powder, and cook 5 minutes more. Add the tablespoon of water if needed to keep the shallots from burning. Meanwhile, place the cream cheese into a microwave-safe bowl, and cook in the microwave until the cream cheese is fairly soft, about 30 seconds on High. Whisk in the eggs and Dijon mustard until the cream cheese is mostly mixed in (a few lumps are fine). Stir the egg mixture into the skillet with the shallots, and cook slowly, stirring occasionally, until the eggs have firmed. They will still be softer than normal scrambled eggs because of the cream cheese.  Season to taste with salt and pepper just as the eggs are ready to come out of the pan.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place the potatoes in a large pot with just enough water to cover. Bring to a boil and simmer until tender, about 10 minutes. Drain and mash, flavoring with milk, butter, salt or however you like to make them. Pour the baked beans into the bottom of a 1 1/2 quart casserole dish. Slice the corned beef and arrange on top of the beans in an even layer. Season with a few dashes of Worcestershire sauce. Top with mashed potatoes. Bake uncovered for 25 minutes in the preheated oven. The mashed potatoes should start to crisp up but not yet brown. Top with the cheese and return to the oven. Bake for another 20 minutes, or until cheese is browned.
Place bananas, papaya, pineapple, honeydew, grapes, ice cubes, and yogurt into the bowl of a blender. Pour in orange juice. Cover and puree until smooth, adding additional orange juice if needed to achieve desired consistency.
Place frozen grapes, applesauce, and lime juice into a blender. Puree until smooth. Add frozen strawberries, cubed pineapple, and mint leaves. Pulse a few times until the strawberries and pineapple are in small bits.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 12 cup muffin pan with cooking spray. In a large skillet, fry the bacon pieces over medium heat until browned and crisp, about 8 minutes. Drain off half of the grease. Transfer the bacon and remaining grease to a large bowl. Stir in the shredded potato, shallot and Parmesan cheese. Divide this mixture evenly between the muffin cups. Pour eggs into each cup, filling to the top. Bake in the preheated oven until the egg is firm, about 12 minutes. Remove from the oven and set the dial to Broil. Place a slice of tomato onto each cupcake and return to the oven. Broil for about 3 minutes, or until toasted. Allow to cool slightly, then arrange the cupcakes on a tray and top each one with a slice avocado, if using.
In a large bowl, stir together the flour, baking powder, baking soda, garlic salt, parsley, rosemary and tarragon. Stir in the shredded Gouda. Set aside. In another bowl, mix together the egg yolks, buttermilk, sour cream and vegetable oil until well blended. Pour the wet ingredients into the flour mixture, and stir until just blended. In a separate clean bowl, whip the egg whites until stiff peaks form. Fold into the waffle batter. Heat the waffle iron, and grease with vegetable oil spray. Use the recommended amount of batter for each waffle according to your iron. Close the lid, and cook until golden brown. Waffles can be held in a warm oven while the others are cooking. Serve with creamed beef or chicken.
Heat 2 Tbs. oil over low heat in a 12-inch non-stick skillet (so potatoes don't stick). While skillet heats, prepare onion and Italian sausage as directed above. A few minutes before cooking, increase heat to medium-high. When oil starts to send up wisps of smoke, add onion and sausage; cook, stirring often, until golden brown. Meanwhile, dice potatoes and apples and toss with remaining oil. Transfer sausage mixture to a bowl and reserve. Add potato mixture to empty skillet; cook, stirring only occasionally so they form a golden-brown crust, about 10 minutes. As potatoes cook, mix ketchup, mustard, dried sage and fresh parsley and 2 Tbs. of water. (Recipe can be prepared to this point up to 2 hours ahead. Spread hot potatoes on a large lipped cookie sheet; cover when cool. Return skillet to medium-high; add potatoes and re-crisp.) Return reserved sausage mixture to skillet; stir in ketchup mixture, then season with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring frequently, until hash has nicely browned, about 5 minutes longer.
In a medium bowl, stir together the flour, wheat bran, salt and apple pie spice. Set aside. In a separate bowl, stir together the water and honey. Sprinkle the yeast over the surface, and let stand for about 5 minutes to dissolve. When the yeast has dissolved, stir in the apples, applesauce, milk and egg whites until well blended. Stir this mixture into the dry ingredients. Cover, and let rest for about 15 minutes. Heat the waffle iron, and coat with cooking spray. Spoon the waffle batter onto the iron in the amount recommended by the manufacturer. Close the iron, and cook for about 7 minutes, or until the steam stops coming out and the waffle can be easily removed. Continue with remaining batter.
In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, barbeque sauce, milk, dill, mustard powder and garlic. Melt butter or margarine in a large skillet over medium heat. Pour in the egg mixture, and cook stirring frequently until eggs are scrambled and cooked through. Remove from heat, and sprinkle cheese over the top. Let stand for a minute to melt cheese, then serve immediately.
Place ingredients in the pan of the bread machine in the order recommended by the manufacturer. Select light setting; press Start.
Place all ingredients in the pan of the bread machine in the order suggested by the manufacturer. Select White Bread cycle, and Start.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 8x4 inch loaf pans. Mix the flour, salt, baking powder, eggs, milk, vegetable oil, white sugar, poppy seeds, 1 1/2 teaspoons of the vanilla, lemon and butter flavoring. Stir until just combined and pour the batter into the prepared pans. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 1 hour. Cool for 5 minutes then poke holes in the top of the bread with a meat fork and pour glaze over tops. To Make Glaze: Mix the orange juice, confectioner's sugar, and the remaining 1/2 teaspoon each of the vanilla, butter and lemon flavorings. Use immediately to pour over the still warm loaves.
In a blender combine nectarine, strawberries, blueberries, milk powder and crushed ice. Blend until smooth. pour into glasses and serve.
Heat oven to 400 degrees F (375 degrees F for dark pan). Coat 24 miniature (1 3/4-inch) or 8 standard muffin cups lightly with no-stick cooking spray. Combine cornbread mix, mustard, milk, sour cream and egg in large bowl. Stir until smooth. Stir in cheese and bacon. Fill muffin cups 3/4 full. Bake 12 to 15 minutes or until light brown. Remove muffins to wire rack; cool slightly before serving.
Heat oven to 400 degrees F. Beat eggs and sour cream with whisk until well blended. Pour into 13x9-inch baking dish sprayed with cooking spray. Bake 10 min. or until egg mixture is softly set. Meanwhile, cook sausage, mushrooms and onions in large skillet on medium heat 6 to 8 min. or until sausage is done, stirring occasionally. Drain. Reduce oven temperature to 325 degrees F. Spoon tomatoes over egg layer; cover with sausage mixture and cheese. Bake 30 min. or until center is set.
Boil water and salt in a saucepan. Stir in quinoa; cover, reduce heat to low, and simmer until tender, about 10 minutes. Stir in chopped prunes, peanut butter, almond milk, cinnamon, and nutmeg. Cover and simmer 5 more minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Pour egg whites, eggs, and cottage cheese into a blender; pulse several times to mix and blend until smooth, about 1 minute. Heat 1 tablespoon olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir asparagus and onion until asparagus is tender, about 8 minutes. Heat 2 teaspoons olive oil in the same skillet over medium heat. Season shrimp with salt and black pepper; cook in hot oil until they turn pink and are no longer translucent in the center, 5 to 8 minutes. Fit pie crust into a 9-inch deep-dish pie plate and spread shrimp into the crust; top with asparagus mixture. Pour cottage cheese mixture over vegetables and shrimp. Spread Monterey Jack cheese over the top of the quiche. Sprinkle green onions over cheese. Bake quiche in the preheated oven until cheese topping is lightly browned and the quiche is set in the center, about 1 hour.
Stir tomato juice, steak sauce, barbeque sauce, celery seed, garlic salt, and black pepper in a large pitcher. Serve in glasses over ice and garnish each serving with a pinch of cayenne pepper, a lemon wedge,  and a celery stick.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease a baking sheet. Whisk the whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Mix vegetable oil, boiling water, honey, and molasses into the flour mixture, and stir until thoroughly combined. Turn the dough out onto a well-floured work surface, and knead a few times to be sure the dough is completely mixed. Divide the dough into quarters, and roll each quarter into a ball. Press each dough ball into a circle about 1/4-inch thick, and place on prepared baking sheet. If desired, use a kitchen knife to lightly score the breads with 2 criss-cross lines to break the breads apart later. Bake in the preheated oven until browned, about 15 minutes. If desired, brush the breads with melted butter after removing from oven.
Empty oatmeal packet into a small serving bowl.  Add hot milk or water and almond butter; stir.  Top with chopped apples, almonds, cinnamon and honey.
Preheat an oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat, and cook and stir the ground beef until the meat is crumbly and evenly browned. Drain and discard any excess grease. Transfer the beef to an 8x8-inch baking dish. Layer about 1/4 of the onion on top of the beef, then spread the grated potatoes over the onion. Season with salt and pepper. Spread another 1/4 of the onion over, then layer the carrots on top. Season with salt and pepper again. Add another layer of onion, then cover with the corn. Season with salt and pepper, then top with the remaining onion. Spread the green beans over the onion, then arrange the bacon slices on top. Cover with aluminum foil. Bake in the preheated oven for 40 minutes, then remove the foil and continue baking until the bacon is crisp and the potatoes are tender, about 20 minutes more.
Heat 2 teaspoons vegetable oil in a large skillet. Cook and stir onion over medium heat until onions begin to brown. Combine tuna, sour cream, cream cheese, mozzarella cheese, olives, dill, garlic powder, and cooked onion in a large bowl. Beat eggs with milk in a large bowl. Heat 2 teaspoons of oil in the skillet used to cook the onions. Pour the egg mixture into the hot pan. As eggs set, lift the edges to allow the liquid to run underneath for even cooking. When eggs are almost fully set, spoon tuna mixture onto one half of the eggs; fold the untopped half over the filling. Cover pan, and remove from heat. Allow omelet to rest in covered pan until the cheese is melted.
Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat and stir in the vegetarian sausage. Cook and stir until the sausage is crumbly, and evenly browned. Stir in the onion, garlic, and bell pepper; cook and stir until softened, 3 to 4 minutes. Remove from heat, and set aside. Spray a 9x13-inch baking dish with non-stick cooking spray. Arrange bread in an even layer in the prepared baking dish. Scatter the sausage mixture on top. Brush with the Dijon mustard, and sprinkle with cheese. Whisk eggs, milk, salt, and pepper in a large bowl, and pour over the cheese. Cover tightly with plastic wrap, and refrigerate for 2 hours or overnight. Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove strata from the refrigerator, and unwrap. Bake in the preheated oven until puffed, lightly browned, and the center is set, 1 hour to 1 1/2 hours. Allow to cool for 5 minutes before serving.
Blend mango, yogurt, almond milk, ice, protein powder, and honey together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil. Arrange bacon slices on the prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until browned and crisp, about 15 minutes; drain on a paper towel-lined plate. Combine maple syrup, peanut butter, and vanilla extract in a small saucepan over medium-high heat; cook and stir until sauce is smooth and heated through, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to low and keep sauce warm. Whisk flour, baking powder, sugar, and salt together in a large bowl. Whisk buttermilk, egg, and olive oil together in a separate bowl; slowly pour into flour mixture and whisk until batter is smooth. Heat a griddle or flat skillet over medium heat; spread melted butter on surface to coat. Arrange bacon slices about 2 inches apart on the hot griddle, working in batches if needed. Slowly pour batter over each bacon strip; cook until bubbles start to form on top and edges are dry, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip pancakes and cook until other side is golden brown, 3 to 4 minutes. Serve with warm maple-peanut butter sauce.
Blend blueberries, banana, cucumber, water, and yogurt together in a blender until smooth. Add crushed ice and blend until smooth.
Blend ice, coconut milk, coffee, sugar, hot chocolate mix, and vanilla extract together in a blender until smooth.
Blend yogurt, orange, banana, strawberries, ice, vanilla extract, and flax seeds together in a blender until smooth.
Place cauliflower into a large pot and cover with water; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low and simmer until tender, 7 to 10 minutes. Drain. Mash cauliflower in a bowl until smooth. Beat Cheddar cheese, Parmesan cheese, eggs, cayenne pepper, and salt into cauliflower. Melt butter in a skillet over medium-high heat. Pour cauliflower mixture into hot butter and cook until golden, about 5 minutes. Flip cauliflower mixture; cook and stir until mixture is more crumbly than creamy, about 10 minutes more.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions and prepare surfaces with cooking spray. Whisk eggs, bananas, and vanilla extract together in a large bowl until smooth. Stir peanut butter into the egg mixture until smooth. Fold oats and chocolate chips through the egg mixture. Cook batter on waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions until golden brown, about 3 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease muffin cups or line with paper liners. Mix white sugar and cinnamon together in a gallon-size resealable bag; add biscuits and toss to coat. Press coated biscuits into muffin cups, about 2/3 full. Heat brown sugar and margarine together in a saucepan over medium-low heat until melted, 3 to 5 minutes; pour over each biscuit muffin. Bake in the preheated oven until dough is cooked through, about 20 minutes.
Process oranges, lemon, green apple, spinach, and kale through a juicer according to manufacturer's recommendations.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels; crumble. Reserve about 2 tablespoons bacon drippings in the skillet. Cook and stir onion and garlic in reserved bacon drippings over medium heat until onion is softened, 5 to 10 minutes. Place thawed pie crust in a pie dish; prick holes in the bottom and sides of crust using a fork. Bake crust in the preheated oven until lightly browned, about 8 minutes. Remove crust from oven and reduce oven temperature to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Whisk half-and-half and sour cream together in a bowl; beat eggs into half-and-half mixture. Mix Swiss cheese, salt, black pepper, and cayenne pepper into half-and-half mixture; add bacon, onion mixture, and parsley. Pour mixture into the crust. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center of the quiche comes out clean, about 45 to 50 minutes. Cool for 10 minutes before slicing into wedges.
Blend pineapple juice, yogurt, strawberries, and banana together in a blender until smooth.
Combine avocados, tomatoes, black beans, corn, cilantro, red onion, oil, vinegar, salt, and black pepper in a bowl until salsa is well mixed. Spoon salsa into each tortilla and top with Monterey Jack cheese. Roll tortilla around filling to create a burrito. Warm burritos on a microwave-safe plate in the microwave until cheese is melted and salsa is warmed, about 45 seconds. Top burritos with sour cream.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook sausage, breaking it apart with a wooden spoon, until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes. Spread over the bottom of a 9x13-inch casserole dish. Mix eggs, Cheddar cheese, cream, onion, mustard, oregano, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Pour mixture over the sausage. Bake in the preheated oven until firm and cooked through, 30 to 40 minutes.
Blend ice cubes, banana, yogurt, pumpkin, cinnamon, and ginger together in a blender until smooth.
Layer milk, protein powder, ice, strawberries, banana, and peanut butter in a blender in this order; blend until creamy and smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a 9x13-inch baking dish with parchment paper. Mix oats, milk powder, brown sugar, baking soda, cinnamon, salt, and baking powder together in a bowl. Whisk milk, eggs, oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl; stir into oats mixture just until mixed. Fold cranberries into oats mixture; spoon into prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until oatmeal is set, about 40 minutes.
Blend almond milk, banana, strawberries, ice cubes, protein powder, vanilla extract, honey, ground flax seeds, ground chia seeds, and cinnamon in a blender until smooth.
Blend spinach, banana, avocado, almond milk, vanilla extract, and cinnamon together in a blender until smooth.
Heat a lightly greased griddle or cast iron skillet over medium-high heat. Mash potatoes with flour, butter, and salt until a stiff dough forms. Turn dough out onto a lightly floured work surface. Knead dough lightly and roll dough out to about 1/2-inch thick. Cut into six triangular wedges. Working in batches, cook scones, turning once on hot griddle until golden brown, 4 to 5 minutes per side.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch pie pan with butter. Whisk eggs together in a large bowl. Add heavy cream; whisk until well-blended. Season with 1 1/2 teaspoon salt and 1/2 teaspoon black pepper. Combine hash browns, Cheddar cheese, bacon, and green onions in another bowl. Season with remaining 1 1/2 teaspoon salt and 1/2 teaspoon black pepper. Pour the egg mixture into the greased pie pan. Add the hash browns mixture gently, making sure that some of the hash browns stay above the egg mixture. Place pie pan on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, about 45 minutes. Let quiche stand until set, about 10 minutes, before slicing into wedges.
Spray a 9 X 13-inch pan with cooking spray. Spread half of the French bread cubes onto the bottom of the 9x 13 pan. Sprinkle with half of the raisins. Cover with remaining bread cubes. Sprinkle remaining raisins on top. Mix eggs, 3 cups Lactaid(R) whole milk, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, white sugar, and vanilla together in a large bowl with an electric mixer until ingredients are well blended, 2 to 3 minutes. Pour over bread mixture in pan. Gently press down bread so it is slightly covered by the liquid. Cover with plastic wrap and put in the refrigerator overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove plastic from casserole and place in the oven. Bake uncovered until set and top is golden brown, about 45 minutes. Whisk powdered sugar, 1/4 teaspoon cinnamon, maple syrup, and 1 tablespoon Lactaid(R) milk together in a bowl. If too think, add a bit more milk. Glaze should be thick but liquid enough to drizzle. Drizzle glaze over warm casserole. Allow glaze to thicken and set before serving, about 10 minutes.
Whisk milk, cinnamon, and vanilla extract together in a shallow bowl. Press each slice of bread lightly into the milk mixture to coat both sides, removing it before it gets soaked. Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Cook coated slices in batches until golden brown and somewhat firm, 5 to 8 minutes per side.
Heat oven to 350 degrees F (180 degrees C). Bake butter in 9-inch square baking dish 2 minutes or until melted. Remove dish from oven; brush butter onto bottom and sides of dish. Beat eggs with mixer in large bowl. Add flour, milk and baking powder; mix until blended. Stir in spinach, cheeses and onion. Spoon into prepared dish. Bake 35 minutes. Let stand 15 minutes before cutting into squares.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Crumble or chop into small pieces. Separate 6 biscuits into 2 rounds each. Press rounds into 12 cups of a muffin tin, pressing up sides to form biscuit dough cups. Mix eggs, bacon pieces, and 1/2 cup shredded cheese together in a bowl. Fill muffin pan biscuits with egg mixture about 3/4 full. Sprinkle remaining 3 tablespoons cheese on top. Bake in preheated oven until egg mixture is set, 18 to 22 minutes. Let cool 5 minutes before serving.
Bring a large pot of lightly salted water to a boil. Cook spaghetti in the boiling water, stirring occasionally until tender yet firm to the bite, about 12 minutes. Drain. Drizzle with 1 teaspoon olive oil; toss to coat. Heat remaining oil in a large, non-stick skillet over medium heat. Add carrots, onions, and celery; cook and stir about 1 minute. Add peas and bell pepper. Cook until the vegetables have softened, 3 to 5 minutes. Add the cooked spaghetti; toss to mix evenly. Reduce heat to medium-low. Slowly pour in beaten eggs. Tilt the pan in all directions so the eggs reach edges of pan. Season with ground black pepper. Cover; cook until bottom has cooked and the upper edges have set, 6 to 8 minutes. Remove cover. Place a large plate over skillet and flip it over. Slide the flipped frittata back into skillet to cook the other side, about 4 more minutes. Transfer frittata to a warm serving platter; allow to rest 10 minutes. Top the frittata with warmed sauce and grated cheese.
Whisk whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour, baking powder, poppy seeds, and salt together in a bowl. Beat eggs in a large bowl. Add milk, bananas, coconut oil, honey, and vanilla extract; whisk together. Pour in flour mixture and stir until just combined. Preheat a lightly oiled griddle on medium-low heat. Ladle batter 1/4 cup at a time onto the prepared griddle, sprinkling a few blueberries over each pancake. Cook until bubbles start to appear and edges are dry, about 3 minutes. Flip and cook until other side is browned, about 2 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Beat milk, eggs, and 1 1/2 tablespoons oil together in a bowl. Add flour and salt. Heat the remaining oil in a skillet over medium heat. Pour in about 1/4 cup batter. Cook until brown, about 3 minutes; turn and continue cooking until other side is brown, about 2 minutes more. Remove crepe and cool. Repeat with the remaining batter. Stir pepper Jack cheese, chicken, sour cream, green onions, jalapeno, garlic, chili powder, and cumin together in a bowl. Spoon 1/2 cup of the mixture onto the center of each crepe. Roll and place, seam-side down, in a single layer in a shallow 9x13-inch baking pan. Sprinkle remaining pepper Jack cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until bubbly and golden brown, 20 to 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Line a 9x13-inch baking sheet with aluminum foil; coat with cooking spray. Combine honey and peanut butter in a microwave-safe bowl; microwave on high until melted, about 20 seconds. Stir well. Place the rolled oats in a large bowl. Drizzle honey-peanut butter mixture over oats; toss to coat. Mix in sunflower seeds, chocolate chips, coconut, brown sugar, vanilla extract, and cinnamon until evenly combined. Spread mixture onto the prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned, about 22 minutes. Let cool for 20 minutes.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease 2 8x4-inch loaf pans. Whisk eggs in a large bowl. Add vegetable oil and pumpkin puree; whisk until smooth. Mix flour, sugar, vanilla pudding mix, baking soda, cinnamon, and salt in a separate bowl; stir into pumpkin mixture. Pour batter into the 2 prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of each loaf comes out clean, 75 to 80 minutes.
Beat eggs, milk, and a pinch of salt together in a bowl. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion and garlic until onion is softened, 5 to 10 minutes. Add mushrooms, spinach, and cherry tomatoes; cook and stir until spinach is wilted, 3 to 5 minutes. Pour egg mixture over vegetable mixture and cook until eggs are still soft and halfway cooked, 2 to 3 minutes. Add mozzarella cheese and Parmesan cheese to egg mixture; cook until eggs are set and cheeses are melted, 3 to 4 more minutes. Season with salt and pepper.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Crepes: In a bowl, combine flour and salt. In a separate bowl, whisk together eggs, milk and melted butter. Whisk egg mixture into flour mixture until smooth. Cover and refrigerate for 1 hour. Strain mixture into a clean bowl. Heat a small non-stick skillet or crepe pan over medium heat. Brush pan with some oil. Pour approximately 1/4 cup batter into centre of pan, swirling pan to coat. Cook for about 1 minute or until bottom is a light golden colour. Flip and cook for 30 seconds. Transfer to plate. Repeat with remaining batter. (Make-ahead: Stack crepes between waxed paper, wrap and refrigerate for up to 3 days or freeze for up to 1 month.) Chicken and Garlic Filling: In a skillet, melt 3 tablespoons of the butter over medium high heat with garlic and thyme. Add chicken and cook, stirring for 5 minutes or until heated through. Stir in cream cheese until melted and smooth. Remove from heat and divide the chicken mixture into centre of each crepe and fold over. Place in shallow casserole dish, overlapping slightly. Melt remaining 2 tablespoons butter and drizzle over stuffed crepes. Place in preheated oven for about 10 minutes or until warmed through. Sprinkle with parsley before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spread wheat germ over a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until toasted, about 5 minutes. Cool slightly, then transfer wheat germ to a large bowl. Stir flour, baking soda, and salt into wheat germ. Beat buttermilk, eggs, and oil in another bowl until smooth; pour egg mixture into flour mixture and stir until batter is just blended. Heat griddle over medium-high heat and coat with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 cup portions of batter onto the griddle  and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 3 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Reheat sausage according to package directions (this will remove any excess moisture). Cool on paper towels for 5 minutes; pat dry. Slice into very thin slices and set aside. Combine 1-1/2 cups flour, undissolved yeast, sugar and salt in large mixer bowl. Add milk, oil, egg and vanilla; beat 2 minutes on medium speed. Gradually add remaining 1-1/4 cups flour to make a stiff yet sticky dough. Stir in sausage. Cover bowl and let rest 10 minutes. Portion dough into 12 (2-1/2 inch) generously greased muffin cups using a scoop or two spoons (do not use paper liners). Cover and let rise 35 to 45 minutes. Dough will rise, but not double in size. Combine sugar and cinnamon for topping in a small bowl; set aside. Bake in preheated 375 degrees F oven for 20 to 25 minutes until well browned. Let cool on wire rack for 2 minutes. Brush with butter and sprinkle with cinnamon sugar mixture. Run a knife around each roll to remove from pan. Serve warm with pancake syrup, if desired. Refrigerate any leftovers.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Spray the inside of the waffle iron with cooking spray. Stir flour, milk powder, corn meal, sugar, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk milk, eggs, butter, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl; pour into flour mixture and stir just until batter is combined. Pour batter, working in batches, into the preheated waffle iron and cook until golden brown, about 5 minutes.
Mix flour and baking powder together in a small bowl. Mix milk, egg, and 2 tablespoons vegetable oil together in a large bowl. Stir flour mixture into milk mixture until batter is smooth. Set aside to allow batter to thicken, about 1 minute. Heat about 1 teaspoon vegetable oil in a skillet or griddle over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, add blueberries, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining oil and batter.
Heat 2 teaspoons oil in a griddle or skillet over medium-high heat. Whisk flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, salt, nutmeg, and cinnamon together in a bowl; make a well in the center. Beat milk, egg, 2 tablespoons oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl; pour into the well in the flour mixture and stir until batter is smooth. Drop about 1/4 cup batter per pancake onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend almond milk, banana, strawberries, yogurt, oats, and almonds together in a NutriBullet(R) or blender until smooth.
Beat eggs, basil, and oregano together in a bowl. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Saute onions with a pinch of salt in hot oil until onion is translucent, 4 to 6 minutes; add mushrooms with another pinch of salt. Saute mushrooms and onion until mushrooms are soft and brown around the edges, 4 to 6 minutes more. Stir ground beef, pepper, and salt into the mushroom mixture. Cook and stir until meat is lightly browned and crumbly, 1 to 3 minutes. Turn off the heat. Push all meat to one side of the skillet and tilt the skillet so that the excess grease runs down to the bottom of the pan. Use a paper towel to blot the grease. Stir spinach into beef mixture and cook over medium heat until spinach is heated through, about 1 minute. Add eggs; cook and stir until eggs are set, 3 to 4 minutes. Season with salt and pepper and top with Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Butter a deep 9-inch baking dish. Combine eggs, milk, thyme, salt, and pepper in a large bowl.  Whisk until smooth.  Stir in tomatoes and feta cheese; pour into prepared baking dish. Scatter bread pieces on top of egg mixture. Bake in preheated oven until eggs are fully set, 40-50 minutes.
Preheat an oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x9-inch baking dish. Cook the sausage in a large skillet over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until completely browned and no longer pink in the center, about 10 minutes. Remove from skillet and slice. Set aside. Line the bottom of the prepared baking dish with the crescent rolls. Spread the hash browns over the crescent roll, then layer with the sliced sausage. Beat the eggs with the milk in a bowl. Pour the egg mixture over the sausage. Bake in the preheated oven until the egg sets, about 50 minutes. Turn the oven off. Sprinkle the Cheddar cheese over the top and return to the oven until the cheese melts, about 5 minutes. Allow pie to cool for 5 minutes before slicing and serving.
Bring quinoa, water, and apple juice to a boil in a saucepan. Reduce heat to medium-low and add cinnamon. Cover and simmer quinoa for 10 minutes. Stir apples into the quinoa; continue simmering until the liquid is absorbed and quinoa is tender about 10 more minutes. Drizzle with agave nectar to serve.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Unroll pie crust and press into an 8-inch pie dish. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir green onions until wilted and beginning to brown, 2 to 3 minutes. Remove from heat. Spread ham over prepared pie crust and top with green onions. Whisk egg substitute, evaporated milk, and mozzarella cheese in a bowl. Pour over ham mixture. Sprinkle with Parmesan cheese and garnish with chives. Bake in preheated oven for 20 minutes. Increase heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and continue baking until quiche is browned, 15 to 20 minutes. Remove from oven and allow quiche to rest until eggs are set, about 30 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Put margarine in a pie dish and melt in the preheating oven. Mix eggs, flour, and milk in a bowl; pour over melted butter. Arrange peach slices atop the egg mixture. Sprinkle sugar over the peach slices. Bake in preheated oven until the pancake is firm in the center, about 30 minutes.
Blend water, avocado, parsley, apple, carrot, lemon, kale, ginger, ice cubes, and flax seeds in a blender on high until smooth, 10 to 15 seconds.
Place eggs in a large saucepan and cover with cold water. Bring water to a boil; cover, remove from heat, and let eggs stand in hot water for 10 to 12 minutes. Remove from hot water, cool, peel and slice. In large saucepan, melt butter over medium heat. Stir in onions and rice; cook, stirring occasionally, until onions are limp. Pour in 2 cups chicken broth, cover and cook until rice is done, about 20 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch casserole dish. In another saucepan, melt remaining 2 tablespoons butter. Whisk in flour. Slowly stir in cream and remaining 2 tablespoons chicken broth; stir constantly until thickened. Remove from heat and season with salt and pepper to taste. Spread half of the cooked rice in bottom of the prepared pan. Top with half of the egg slices, half of the diced green chilies and half of each of the cheeses. Spoon half of the chicken gravy the eggs. Repeat with remaining ingredients. Bake uncovered in preheated oven until bubbly and golden. Sprinkle with paprika if desired.
In a large saucepan, combine sweet potato, squash, and carrots. Pour in enough water to cover vegetables. Cook over low heat until very tender, about 40 minutes. Drain and mash. Allow to cool. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 12 inch pie pan. To mashed squash mixture, add 2 eggs, butter or margarine, olive oil, 1/2 teaspoon salt, brown sugar, curry powder, cumin, cinnamon, and nutmeg. Puree mixture in blender or food processor. In food processor or blender, combine spinach, 2 eggs, 1/2 teaspoon salt, pepper, and half and half. Puree until smooth. Stir in 2 tablespoons bread crumbs. If mixture is still liquidy, add more bread crumbs. Pour spinach mixture into pie pan, flattening with a spoon. Gently pour squash mixture on top of spinach layer. Flatten partially with a spoon, but leave a few waves. Do not spread squash mixture all the way to edges of pan; allow spinach mixture to 'peek' through edges. Using a spoon, gently stir the two mixtures to create a marbled effect. Do not overmix. Bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes, until set in center.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease 3 to 4 mini loaf pans (5x3 inches each). Zest and juice an orange; set 1 tablespoon zest aside. Pour orange juice into a one-cup measuring cup, add boiling water to fill to one cup measurement. Pour juice mixture into a bowl and add the melted shortening, vanilla, egg, flour, salt, baking powder, baking soda, sugar, grated orange zest and chopped nuts. Stir well and pour batter into the prepared pans. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 45 minutes or until a toothpick comes out clean and bread is nicely browned.
In a medium bowl, combine Worcestershire sauce, olive oil, lime juice, cilantro, tomatoes, red onion, salt and pepper. Place steak in a shallow non-metallic container and cover with marinate. Refrigerate for 1 hour. Grill steak under a preheated broiler or on a grill for 4 minutes on one side and 1 minute on the other. Remove from heat, dice into small cubes and set aside. In a lightly oiled skillet, cook and scramble eggs to desired firmness. Season with hot pepper sauce, salt and pepper. Pour marinade into a medium sauce pan and bring to a simmer over medium heat. Add green peppers, mushrooms and garlic; simmer for 10 minutes. Warm tortillas on a grill or in microwave. Line tortillas with meat and vegetables; place eggs on top. Wrap and serve.
Slice edges off of potatoes so that potatoes are roughly square; thinly slice. Heat olive oil in medium skillet over medium heat. Add potatoes and lightly fry. Remove potatoes with a slotted spoon and set aside. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Remove bacon, crumble and set aside. Reserve 1 tablespoon bacon grease and cook ham, onion and red pepper. Remove from heat. Beat together eggs and Spanish seasoning. Pour eggs into skillet with vegetables. Add bacon and potatoes. Cook over medium heat, without stirring until bottom begins to brown. Turn omelet over and allow both sides to brown. Serve warm.
In a microwave safe bowl, combine apple cider and oats. In a separate bowl, stir together butter, cider vinegar and cinnamon. Stir the two mixtures together and microwave on high for 2 minutes. Let cool to lukewarm. Stir together flour, baking powder, raisins and eggs. Blend flour mixture into oatmeal mixture. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Butter a 9x13 inch baking dish. In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, salad dressing and melted butter. Season with salt, pepper, garlic, thyme and savory. Place enough slices of bread into the prepared baking dish to cover the bottom. Spread the thawed broccoli over the bread. Pour half of the egg mixture over. Make another layer of bread slices, and pour the remaining egg mixture over. Cover with shredded Cheddar cheese. Bake for 45 minutes in the preheated oven, or until the strata is golden brown and puffy. Let stand for a few minutes before cutting into squares to serve.
Heat 1 tablespoon of olive oil in a heavy skillet over medium heat. Add shallot, and cook until lightly browned. Remove from the pan, and set aside. Fry the ham slices in the same skillet just until browned on each side. As you turn the ham to brown on the second side, place the spinach leaves on top to steam a little. Remove from the skillet and place onto a plate or onto toasted English muffins, keeping the spinach on top. Heat the remaining tablespoon of oil in the skillet. Crack the eggs in, and fry on each side to your desired degree of doneness. Place the eggs on top of the ham stacks. Return the shallots to the skillet, and season with curry powder. Gradually stir in pineapple juice, scraping the bottom of the pan to mix in all of the browned bits. Increase the heat to medium-high, and boil until the sauce has reduced and thickened. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Spoon sauce over the egg stacks and serve immediately.
In a blender, combine banana, milk, egg, wheat germ, honey, vanilla and nutmeg. Blend until smooth. Pour into a chilled glass and serve.
Melt the butter in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir the potatoes in the butter until browned, about 10 minutes; season with salt and pepper. Add the onion and cook until the potatoes are tender, another 3 to 5 minutes. Reduce heat to low. Stir in the cilantro, green onion, and curry powder; mix and cook another 2 to 3 minutes.
Bring 5 cups of water and the sugar to a boil in a saucepan, then remove from the heat and add the tea bags. Allow tea to steep while you mix the lemonade concentrate and remaining water in a large pitcher. Pour the tea mixture into the lemonade, discarding tea bags. Stir and refrigerate until cold before serving.
Place the banana, strawberries, flax seed meal, and soy milk into a blender. Puree until smooth.
Melt the butter in a heavy saucepan over medium heat. Mix in the cheese once it is melted. Dip each slice of bread into the melted cheese, coating both sides. Heat a skillet over medium heat. Place one slice of bread into the skillet and top with 2 slices of ham. Place the second piece of bread on top. Fry until golden on each side, then remove from the skillet and set aside. Fry the egg in the hot skillet to your liking: easy, medium, or well done. Place the fried egg on top of the sandwich and serve.
Stir together flour, sugar, baking powder, and baking soda in a bowl until well combined. Whisk together egg yolks, buttermilk, milk, vanilla extract, and butter in a large bowl until smooth. Whip egg whites in a clean bowl to soft peaks. Fold the flour mixture into the egg yolk mixture until blended, then fold in the whipped egg whites. Preheat a Belgian waffle iron and coat with cooking spray. Spoon about 1/2 cup of batter per waffle, depending on the size of your waffle iron, onto the center of the hot iron. Close the lid and cook until steam stops coming out and the waffle is golden brown, about 90 seconds.
Place the apple juice, iced tea powder, blueberries, banana, and lemon juice into a blender pitcher. Blend on high until smooth.
Preheat an oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Chill the pie crust at least 20 minutes before baking to prevent shrinkage. Prick the pie crust with a fork and line with a double layer of aluminum foil and a layer of pie weights or dried beans. Bake in the preheated oven until edge of crust is golden, about 10 minutes. Carefully remove the foil and weights and bake until the crust has set, about 5 minutes more. Cook and stir the ground beef and onion in a large skillet over medium-high heat until the beef is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink. Drain and discard any excess grease. Beat the eggs in a mixing bowl with the salt, pepper, and nutmeg until smooth. Whisk in the heavy cream, followed by the spinach and the beef mixture. Pour into the prepared pie crust and sprinkle with Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, 35 to 45 minutes. Let stand 5 to 10 minutes before slicing.
Pour milk into a steaming pitcher and heat to 145 degrees F to 165 degrees F (65 to 70 degrees C) using the steaming wand. Measure the white chocolate syrup into a large coffee mug. Brew espresso, then add to mug. Pour the steamed milk into the mug, using a spoon to hold back the foam. Top with whipped cream and serve.
Heat oven to 400 degrees F. Grease 12-cup regular muffin cup pan; set aside. In medium bowl combine hash browns, melted butter and salt; mix well. Press about 1/4 cup hash brown mixture into each muffin cup lining bottom and sides. Bake for 12 to 15 minutes or until edges are golden brown. Meanwhile, brown Italian sausage in 10-inch skillet; drain fat. Add mushrooms and red bell pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, until vegetables are tender. Fill each baked hash brown cup equally with sausage mixture. In small bowl combine AllWhites and Italian seasoning; mix well. Pour AllWhites over sausage mixture filling each muffin cup equally. Sprinkle with cheese. Bake for 12 to 14 minutes or until toothpick inserted in center of cup comes out clean.
Preheat an oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a 9 inch pie plate. Beat eggs in a large bowl. Whisk in the sour cream; mix until smooth. Mix in the spinach, Cheddar cheese, feta cheese, Parmesan cheese, onion, tomato, green chiles, garlic, cumin, paprika, and cayenne pepper. Pour the egg mixture into the prepared pie plate. Set pie plate on a baking sheet. Bake quiche until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, about 1 hour.
Place the blueberries, raspberries, strawberries, pomegranate and mango juices, milk, and honey into a blender. Cover, and puree until smooth. Pour into glasses to serve.
In a blender, combine blueberries, apples, raspberries, grapes, sugar and ice. Blend until smooth. Pour into glasses and serve.
In a medium bowl, mix together the oil, eggs and milk. Combine the flour and salt, and mix into the egg mixture. Melt margarine in a large skillet over medium heat. Pour the batter into the pan, and cook until it starts to brown on the bottom. Then, chop it up with a spatula, and continue cooking until it is no longer doughy.
Preheat your waffle iron. In a small bowl, mix together the eggs, milk and oil. In a larger bowl, stir together the flour, cornmeal, baking powder, sugar and salt. Make a well in the center, and pour in the milk mixture. Stir until well blended. Pour 1/4 cup batter onto the heated waffle iron. Amount may be different for different irons. Place a strip of raw bacon over the batter across each section of the waffle iron. Close the lid, and cook until steam is no longer coming out, and the waffle is golden brown. For the cheese sauce, melt processed cheese in a bowl in the microwave. Gradually stir in milk until you reach your desired thickness. Drizzle cheese sauce over waffles before serving.
Place eggs in a saucepan and cover with cold water. Bring water to a boil and immediately remove from heat. Cover and let eggs stand in hot water for 10 to 12 minutes. Remove from hot water, cool, peel and chop. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. In a medium sized saucepan, melt butter over medium heat. When butter has melted, whisk in the flour. Stir until all lumps have dissolved. Slowly pour in the milk, stirring constantly, until thickened. As gravy begins to thicken,  add chopped eggs and 2 cup cheese. Cook 3 to 5 minutes to melt the cheese and heat through. Stir in the sour cream, cayenne, salt and pepper; stir until heated through. Keep warm over low heat until ready to serve (do not boil). Slice cornbread pieces and lay open on serving plates. Ladle a generous amount of egg mixture over the cornbread, top with remaining shredded cheese, crumbled bacon, and green onion.
Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add mushrooms and peppers; saute until soft. Sprinkle with basil and remove from pan. Pour eggs into pan and return to heat. Cook eggs until semi-solid, then flip. Place mushroom mixture and cheese on top of omelet. Season with pepper and fold in half. Cook until firm. Serve warm.
In a large bowl combine flour, white sugar, salt, cinnamon and yeast; mix well. Add vanilla, milk, butter, and egg until well blended. Cover and place in refrigerator overnight. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Stir the batter with a whisk. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
In a small bowl, soak grape nuts in buttermilk for 1 hour. In a large bowl, combine buttermilk mixture, sugar, salt, egg, and baking soda.  Stir until sugar dissolves.  Mix in the melted shortening and the flour.  Pour batter into a greased and floured 9 x 5 inch loaf pan. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for about 45 minutes.  Cool.
Drain apricots, and save syrup. Puree apricots in a food processor, adding syrup if necessary to make 1 cup. Whisk together the flour, baking powder, soda, and salt. In a large bowl, cream together shortening and sugar. Add eggs one at a time, and beat fill fluffy. Add flour mixture alternately with apricot puree to the creamed mixture. Stir in nuts. Spread batter into a greased and floured 9 x 5 loaf pan. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 50 minutes.  Remove from pan, and cool on a rack.
In a medium mixing bowl, beat the egg with the apple juice and melted butter. Add the remaining ingredients and stir. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot. This batter must be used right away and can not sit and wait.
Place tofu, soy milk, yogurt, raspberries, banana, and orange juice in a blender. Blend until smooth. Pour in glasses over ice or vanilla ice cream.
Cook sausage, onions and peppers in medium nonstick skillet on medium heat 4 to 5 min. or until sausage is done and vegetables are crisp-tender. Remove from skillet. Add eggs to skillet; cook and stir 2 min. or until set. Return sausage mixture to skillet; stir. Top with cheese. Spoon onto tortillas; fold in opposite sides of each tortilla, then roll up burrito-style.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 9x13-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Line bottom of prepared baking dish with bread cubes. Beat eggs, milk, 2 tablespoons sweetener, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, and vanilla extract together in a bowl; pour mixture over bread cubes. Let stand 10 minutes (or refrigerate up to overnight if desired). Combine remaining 2 tablespoons sweetener with remaining 1 teaspoon cinnamon; sprinkle mixture over the casserole. Bake in the preheated oven until casserole is set and topping is crunchy, 30 to 40 minutes.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Press one package crescent roll dough into a 9-inch baking dish; cut remaining package crescent roll dough into 1-inch strips. Stir eggs, ham, Cheddar cheese, and Parmesan cheese together in a bowl; pour mixture into prepared baking dish. Arrange crescent roll strips over ham mixture creating a crisscross pattern. Bake in preheated oven until golden brown and set, 50 to 60 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Wrap sweet potato in aluminum foil. Bake sweet potato in the preheated oven until easily pierced with a fork, about 1 hour. Set aside to cool. Whisk white sugar and canola oil together in a bowl. Add eggs; mix well. Sift flour, cinnamon, and nutmeg into sugar mixture. Slowly whisk water into flour-sugar mixture until incorporated. Peel sweet potato; mash into the batter. Fold in 1/2 cup chopped pecans. Reduce oven temperature to 320 degrees F (160 degrees C). Spray a 9x5-inch loaf pan with cooking spray. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of the bread comes out clean, about 1 hour. Heat brown sugar and butter in a small saucepan over low heat until sugar is dissolved, about 5 minutes. Add 1/2 cup chopped pecans and stir to combine. Remove from heat. Pour glaze over bread.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Beat eggs, mayonnaise, milk, flour, and 1 teaspoon seafood seasoning in a bowl until smooth and creamy; stir Cheddar cheese and parsley into egg mixture. Gently fold crabmeat into the filling. Pour crabmeat filling into the pie crust. Sprinkle a pinch of seafood seasoning over the quiche. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center of the quiche comes out clean and the top is lightly browned, 40 to 45 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Spray a 12-cup muffin tin with cooking spray. Flatten croissants out using a rolling pin on a work surface; cut into 4-inch squares. Press croissant squares in the prepared muffin cups. Beat eggs, milk, onion powder, nutmeg, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl. Stir in three-cheese blend and spinach. Spoon egg mixture into croissant squares until about 2/3 full. Bake in the preheated oven until browned and egg is set in the middle, about 20 minutes.
Mix flour, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk milk, egg, 2 tablespoons vegetable oil, maple syrup, cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves together in a separate bowl. Stir milk mixture into flour mixture until just blended. Heat 2 teaspoons vegetable oil on a griddle over medium heat; pour about 1/4 cup batter onto the hot griddle. Cook until bubbles begin to form on top of pancakes, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip and cook until second side is golden brown, 3 to 5 more minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Beat 1/2 cup softened butter with 1/2 cup white sugar and sucralose sweetener in a bowl until creamy. Beat in eggs, applesauce, vanilla extract, 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon, nutmeg, and allspice until smooth. Mix 2 cups flour, baking soda, and salt together in a separate bowl; stir into butter mixture, alternating with buttermilk until just combined. Fold in chopped and shredded apples and walnuts. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan. Mix 1/3 cup flour, rolled oats, 2 tablespoons white sugar, brown sugar, and 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon together in a bowl; cut in 3 tablespoons cold butter until mixture is crumbly. Sprinkle topping over batter. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of the bread comes out clean, 55 to 60 minutes. Cool in pan for 10 minutes before removing to a wire rack to cool completely.
Place banana chunks into a sealable plastic bag and freeze until solid, 1 to 2 hours to overnight. Place frozen bananas into a blender with skim milk, almond butter, and vanilla extract; blend until smooth. Pour into a large glass and garnish with a pinch of ground cinnamon to serve.
Bring 4 cups water to a boil in a saucepan and slowly whisk in grits, followed by salt and black pepper. Reduce heat to low and simmer the grits until tender and thickened, about 30 minutes. Stir 1 tablespoon unsalted butter into grits, season with more salt and black pepper if needed, and remove from heat. Cover pan and keep grits warm. Sprinkle shrimp with salt and black pepper. Melt 2 tablespoons unsalted butter in a skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir shrimp, garlic, and cayenne pepper until shrimp are pink and no longer translucent inside, 3 to 4 minutes. Stir 2 tablespoons water into shrimp and mix in lemon juice and parsley. Sprinkle with more salt and pepper if desired. Portion cooked grits into serving bowls and top with shrimp and sauce; serve with lemon wedges.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Heat 1 1/2 teaspoon olive oil in a nonstick oven-safe skillet over medium heat; cook and stir green onions and garlic in the hot oil until the garlic is fragrant but not browned, about 1 minute. Stir in spinach, cover skillet, and cook until spinach is wilted, about 5 minutes. Transfer spinach to a large bowl. Heat 1 1/2 teaspoon olive oil in same skillet and turn heat to medium-high. Cook and stir mushrooms until lightly browned, about 5 minutes; remove from heat. Squeeze any moisture from spinach mixture and stir into mushrooms. Beat eggs in a bowl until thoroughly combined. Stir eggs into the spinach-mushroom mixture; thoroughly stir in feta and jalapeno yogurt cheeses. Spoon the mixture back into the skillet; use a spoon to level surface. Wipe any filling from edge of skillet above the filling with a paper towel. Bake in the preheated oven until the quiche is golden brown, about 45 minutes. Let cool slightly before cutting into slices.
Stir the flour, sugar, baking powder, salt, cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves together in a large bowl; mix in the egg, milk, butter, and vanilla until just combined. Heat an aebleskiver pan over medium heat; prepare with cooking spray. Pour the batter into each cup to about 2/3 full. Allow the batter to cook in the bottom of the cup 3 to 4 minutes until golden brown. Don't forget which cup you placed the batter in first, it's all about rotation! Use a long skewer or knitting needle to lift one edge and give it a 1/4 turn. The uncooked batter will spill over into the cup, and cook. Continue lifting and turning the edges until the batter is fully cooked into a golden brown ball. Drain on paper towels.
Heat 2 tablespoons olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Cook the potatoes in the heated oil until they begin to soften, about 5 minutes. Add the onion and garlic; continue cooking until the onions sweat and begin to caramelize. Season with chipotle chile powder, cumin, coriander, salt, and pepper; stir. Transfer to a bowl and cover with a plate to retain the heat. Pour 2 tablespoons olive oil into the skillet and return to medium heat. Crack the eggs into the heated oil and cook until they begin to turn opaque; flip and continue cooking until no clear white remains. (Don't overcook the eggs -- the best part of this meal is the smoothness that the yolk adds to the mix). Place the cooked eggs atop the potato mixture. Top with cilantro, feta cheese, and avocado to serve.
Beat eggs, vanilla, cinnamon, and sugar together in a bowl. Place bread into the egg mixture to soak. Heat a lightly oiled skillet over medium heat and brown the slices of bread on both sides. Heat a smaller lightly oiled skillet over medium-low heat and pour the remaining egg mixture into the skillet. Allow the eggs to set in the skillet for 1 to 2 minutes, then continue to cook and stir eggs until scrambled. Place 1 slice of toast onto a plate and top with the eggs. Layer the slices of banana over the eggs, then place the second slice of toast on top to make a sandwich.
Preheat the broiler; place the rack about 5 inches from the broiling unit. Whisk eggs in a bowl. Add cream, hot sauce, basil, oregano, black pepper, and 1 tablespoon of the grated Parmesan cheese. Heat oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Melt the butter in the skillet and swirl it around to coat the pan evenly. Place the oysters in the skillet and brown on both sides, about 1 minute on each side. Let the liquid reduce a bit, about 30 seconds longer. Slowly pour the egg mixture over the oysters, keeping the oysters evenly distributed in the pan. After about 30 seconds, shake the pan slightly but do not stir. After about 3 minutes when the bottom and sides of the eggs begin to set, sprinkle the remaining cheese on top and place the pan under the broiler. Broil until the eggs begin to puff around the edges and the top is nicely browned, 5 to 7 minutes. Remove from the oven; sprinkle with chopped parsley. Serve immediately from the skillet in wedge-shaped pieces.
Place shredded potatoes and apple in a clean kitchen towel. Gather towel on top and wring out excess liquid. Combine potatoes, apple, eggs, flour, and green onion in a bowl. Heat vegetable oil in a large heavy sauce pan over medium-high heat. Form mixture into palm-sized patties; fry in hot oil, working in batches, until golden brown, 2 to 4 minutes on each side. More oil may be needed with each batch. Remove pancakes from oil with a slotted spoon and drain on paper towel-lined plate. Sprinkle with salt. Serve pancakes topped with sour cream.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Mix canned ham, dried onion, 1 teaspoon of poppy seeds, and margarine together in a bowl until thoroughly combined. Separate the biscuits; press 5 biscuits onto an ungreased baking sheet so each biscuit is flattened and about  3 1/2 inches in diameter. Spoon about 2 tablespoons of ham mixture into the center each flattened biscuit. Fold Swiss cheese slices to break into quarters and place 4 quarters atop the ham. Spoon the remaining ham mixture over the Swiss cheese pieces. On a floured work surface, lightly press remaining 5 biscuits into 4-inch circles. Lay a 4-inch biscuit circle onto of each topped biscuit and lightly stretch the top biscuit to cover the filling. Press the edges together lightly but do not seal tightly together. Sprinkle each filled biscuit with a pinch of poppy seeds for garnish. Bake in the preheated oven until biscuit tops are golden brown and the filling is hot, 10 to 15 minutes. Serve warm.
Beat egg in a microwave-safe bowl; add 1 cup plus 3 tablespoons milk, oats, raisins, brown sugar, vanilla extract, butter, cinnamon, and salt and mix well. Microwave on high for 1 minute; stir and microwave for 1 minute more. Stir oatmeal and microwave until cooked, about 1 minute more.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Grease 12 muffin cups with olive oil. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, 5 to 10 minutes. Transfer bacon to a paper towel-lined plate to drain. Saute onion, spinach, and mushrooms in the same skillet until onions are soft, 5 to 10 minutes. Remove from heat and cool slightly. Blend onion mixture in a blender until smooth. Beat onion mixture, eggs, feta cheese, and bacon together in a bowl until batter is well-combined. Pour batter into prepared muffin cups. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center of a muffin comes out clean, about 35 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Prepare a 1 1/2 quart casserole dish with 1 teaspoon coconut oil or cooking spray. Place carrots into a large pot and cover with water; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low and simmer until very tender, about 45 minutes. Drain and transfer carrots to a food processor. Add 1/2 cup coconut oil, coconut flour, lemon juice, vanilla extract, honey, nutmeg, cinnamon, baking soda, and salt to food processor; blend until smooth. Blend eggs, adding 1 at a time and processing after each addition, into carrot mixture. Spoon carrot mixture into the prepared casserole dish, allowing room to rise. Bake in the preheated oven until top is golden brown, 45 to 60 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Mix white sugar, brown sugar, and melted butter together in a large bowl. Stir in eggs and vanilla extract; mix in pumpkin until thoroughly combined. Whisk flour, cinnamon, baking powder, baking soda, nutmeg, cloves, and salt together in a separate bowl. Mix flour mixture into pumpkin mixture until incorporated. Pour batter into three 5x9-inch loaf pans. Smooth batter evenly in each pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the middle of each loaf comes out clean, 45 to 50 minutes.
Whisk eggs, milk, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Heat a 6-inch nonstick skillet over medium heat; pour egg mixture into the hot skillet, tilting so egg mixture covers the entire bottom of skillet. Slowly cook egg mixture until set, 5 to 10 minutes. Arrange small dollops of cream cheese onto half the omelet; sprinkle tomato and chives over cream cheese. Fold omelet in half over the fillings. Remove skillet from heat and cover until cream cheese has softened, 2 to 3 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F. Grease a 9-inch deep-dish pie plate; set aside. Place cauliflower in a food processor in batches. Cover and pulse each batch until crumbly and mixture resembles the texture of rice. In a very large skillet, heat 1 tablespoon of the oil over medium-high heat. Add the cauliflower and cook, stirring occasionally, about 4 minutes, or until cauliflower is tender and starting to brown. In a medium bowl, combine the cauliflower, 1 egg, 1/2 cup of the cheese, the panko, and 2 tablespoons chives. Press mixture onto the bottom and up the sides of the prepared pie plate. In the same skillet, heat remaining 1 tablespoon of oil over medium heat. Add sweet pepper and cook for 2 minutes, or until it begins to soften. Add sausage and onion and cook for 5 minutes, stirring occasionally, until onion softens and sausage begins to brown. Spoon sausage mixture and remaining 1/2 cup cheese into cauliflower crust. In a medium bowl, whisk together remaining 4 eggs, whipping cream, and flour. Pour over sausage mixture in crust. Bake, uncovered, for 30 to 40 minutes or until a knife inserted near center comes out clean. Let stand on a wire rack for 10 minutes before serving. Sprinkle with additional chives, if desired.
Sprinkle Cheddar cheese into a nonstick skillet over medium heat, forming a circular shape. Fry until cheese is bubbling and starts to brown around the edges, about 2 minutes. Sprinkle red pepper flakes over the cheese. Crack egg over the center. Poke the tip of your spatula through the egg white until some of it runs out and flattens over the pan. Cook until cheese is browned to your liking and egg white starts to set, 3 to 5 minutes more. Scrape up the sides using your spatula and fold them over the yolk. Continue cooking for a few seconds until egg is securely encased but still runny. Transfer onto toast and top with green onions. Break open the yolk and sprinkle salt on top.
Cook and stir bacon in a skillet over medium heat until crispy, about 5 minutes. Transfer to a paper towel-lined plate to drain, discarding most of the grease. Return skillet to the stove and add olive oil; heat over medium heat. Add potatoes, salt, and pepper; cook and stir until browned and somewhat crispy, about 10 minutes. Mix onion into potatoes and cook until onion is translucent, about 5 minutes. Return bacon to the skillet; cook and stir until heated through, 1 to 2 minutes. Pour eggs over potato mixture; cook and stir until eggs are set, 5 to 6 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Spray a 13 x 9 baking dish with non-stick cooking spray. Heat a non-stick skillet over medium-high heat until hot.  Add the sausage to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally, until browned; drain and set aside. Place the potato rounds in the prepared baking dish. Arrange the cooked sausage evenly over the potatoes. Beat the eggs with the milk in a medium bowl or a 1-quart glass measure. Pour egg mixture over potatoes and sausage. Sprinkle cheese over eggs. Crumble bacon over cheese. Cover with foil, and bake for 40 minutes or until eggs are set and the dish has cooked through. Uncover, and bake an additional 10 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C).  Prepare 24-cup mini-muffin pan with cooking spray. Toss cheese and ham together in a bowl; distribute evenly between the 24 prepared muffin cups. Beat eggs, onion powder, garlic powder, and pepper together with a whisk in a bowl; pour in equal amounts over ham and cheese in muffin cups. Bake in preheated oven until tops turn light golden brown, about 12 minutes. Remove frittatas form cups with a spoon.
Blend avocado, orange juice, vanilla yogurt, ice cubes, strawberries, honey, and flax seed meal together in a blender until smooth, at least 45 seconds.
Whisk eggs lightly in a large bowl. Add applesauce and vanilla extract; mix to combine. Combine almond flour, tapioca flour, cinnamon, baking soda, and salt in a separate bowl. Add to egg mixture; mix until just combined. Add water until batter is desired thickness. Set batter aside to rest for 15 minutes. Melt coconut oil on a griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Mix almond milk, oats, chia seeds, coconut, maple syrup, cocoa powder, and vanilla extract in a 12-ounce mason jar. Cover and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Stir and serve cold.
Combine flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk coconut milk, egg, butter, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl; stir into the flour mixture just until batter is combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Sift flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt into a large bowl. Stir egg yolks and vanilla extract into flour mixture. Mix milk, alternating with butter in 3 to 4 additions, into flour mixture until batter is smooth. Beat egg whites in a glass, metal, or ceramic bowl until soft peaks form. Lift your beater or whisk straight up: the egg whites will form soft mounds. Gently fold egg whites into batter; let rest 10 to 15 minutes. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Spoon batter into the waffle iron and cook according to manufacturer's instructions.
Heat oil in a skillet over medium-high heat; saute zucchini until tender, about 10 minutes. Season zucchini with salt and black pepper. Beat eggs with a fork in a bowl; add water and beat until evenly combined. Pour eggs over zucchini; cook and stir until eggs are scrambled and no longer runny, about 5 minutes. Season zucchini and eggs with salt and black pepper.
Blend pineapple, mango, yogurt, and milk together in a blender until smooth and creamy.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). (Set countertop conduction oven to Combo 2.) Line a rimmed baking sheet with aluminum foil, extending it up the sides. Arrange bacon in a single layer on the foil (slight overlapping is okay as bacon will shrink). Place in preheated oven and cook until your desired level of doneness is reached, 10 and 20 minutes. (For countertop induction oven, cook bacon 8 to 10 minutes.) Transfer bacon to a paper-towel lined plate to drain and reserve bacon fat. Place Greek yogurt in a bowl. Cut 1 cucumber in half and grate half into the yogurt. Stir in minced garlic, white pepper, and kosher salt to make tzatziki sauce. Slice the remaining cucumber into thin slices and set aside. Heat a large skillet over medium heat. Add sausage; cook and stir until browned, 5 to 8 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Drain grease. Transfer bacon fat to skillet over medium heat. Add pita rounds; toast until golden brown, about 30 seconds per side. Drain on paper towels. Top each pita with bacon and sausage. Layer tzatziki sauce, spring mix, Roma tomatoes, cucumber slices, and onion on each pita. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a small skillet. Crack in 1 egg; cook until set but still soft, about 1 1/2 minutes per side. Place egg on top of layered pita. Repeat with remaining oil and eggs. Season with salt and pepper.
Combine cream cheese and jam together in a microwave-safe bowl; cook in the microwave on medium power until softened, about 30 seconds. Stir well. Whisk milk, egg, vanilla extract, and cinnamon together in a bowl until frothy. Dip bread slices into egg mixture until evenly coated on each side. Heat non-stick skillet over medium heat until water drops "skitter" across its surface; add coated bread slices in single layer. Cook, turning frequently to avoid burning, until golden but not yet brown, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Spoon cream cheese mixture onto 1 slice; cover with second slice. Continue to cook until brown, 1 to 2 minutes more per side.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat a large skillet over medium heat. Add bacon and onion; cook and stir until sizzling, about 5 minutes. Add beef; season with salt and pepper. Cook and stir until beef is no longer pink, about 5 minutes. Season with garlic salt and onion powder. Cook until browned, about 5 minutes more. Drain excess grease. Press beef mixture into the bottom of a 9-inch pie plate. Cover with 3/4 cup shredded Cheddar cheese. Whisk eggs, mayonnaise, and heavy cream together in a bowl. Pour over Cheddar cheese and beef mixture in the pie plate. Bake in the preheated oven until set, about 45 minutes. Sprinkle remaining 1/4 cup Cheddar cheese on top. Continue baking until cheese is melted, about 10 minutes.
Place the bun tops, top down, in a buttered, 13- x 9-inch casserole dish. Set aside the bun bottoms. In a large skillet, melt butter over medium-high heat, until sizzling. Add onion and saute until they're just softening. Add mushroom slices and stir, reducing heat to medium. Cook for about 5 minutes. Stir in herbs, garlic, paprika and salt and pepper to taste, then add spinach and cook another 3 minutes, stirring to wilt the spinach. Remove from heat. Spoon half the vegetable mixture evenly over the bun tops in the casserole dish. Scatter half the bacon and cheese evenly on top. Place the bun bottoms, with cut side up, in the casserole to form the top layer. Spoon the rest of the vegetable mixture, bacon and cheese over the top layer of buns. In a bowl, stir together eggs and milk until blended. Pour the mixture evenly over the casserole. Using a spatula, press down firmly on each of the buns to submerge in the liquid. Cover tightly with plastic wrap and refrigerate 8 hours or overnight. In the morning, let casserole sit at room temperature for about 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Bake for 35 to 40 minutes or until firm at the center and a toothpick inserted comes away clean. Serve warm.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Line 9 muffin wells with cupcake liners or spray with nonstick spray. Whisk powder drink mix, flour, baking soda, baking powder, and salt together in a medium bowl. Whisk applesauce, yogurt, sugar, egg, and vanilla extract in a separate large bowl. Add the flour mixture; mix until just combined. Fold in chocolate chips. Bake in the preheated oven for 7 minutes. Reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and bake until muffins spring back when touched, an additional 10 to 12 minutes.
Blend 2 cups water, tomato paste, lemon juice, sugar, and salt together in a blender until smooth; pour into a 1/2 gallon container. Stir 3 cups water into mixture. Refrigerate until thickened, about 1 hour. Add 1 more cup water if juice is too thick.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Press pie crust into a 9-inch deep-dish pie pan. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir chorizo in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 10 minutes; drain and discard grease. Lightly beat eggs and milk together in a large bowl; stir in tomatoes with green chile peppers and half the Mexican cheese blend. Spread refried beans evenly across the bottom of the pie crust; layer chorizo onto refried beans. Pour egg mixture over chorizo layer; top with remaining Mexican cheese blend. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted in the middle of the quiche comes out clean and cheese is lightly browned, about 45 minutes. Remove from oven and cool for 15 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Grease 13 x 9-inch baking dish with 1 tablespoon Country Crock(R) Spread; set aside. Melt remaining Spread in 12-inch nonstick skillet over medium-high heat and cook vegetables, stirring occasionally, until tender, about 8 minutes. Whisk eggs with milk in large bowl. Stir in 1 1/2 cups cheese, cooked vegetables, potatoes and bacon. Pour into prepared baking dish. Cover with aluminum foil and bake 45 minutes. Uncover, then sprinkle with remaining 1/2 cup cheese and bake 30 minutes or until eggs are thoroughly cooked.
Coat the inside of a slow cooker with cooking spray. Combine almond milk, oats, apples, raisins, walnuts, brown sugar, butter, cinnamon, and salt in the prepared slow cooker. Cook on Low for 7 to 8 hours.
Melt butter and olive oil together in a large frying pan over medium heat. Cook and stir potatoes, chicken, onion, green bell pepper, chicken broth, steak seasoning, garlic powder, and seasoned salt in the hot butter-oil mixture until chicken is no longer pink in the center and liquid is evaporated, 15 to 20 minutes. Add more olive oil if mixture becomes dry. Stir broccolini and Cheddar cheese into chicken hash; cook until broccolini are tender and Cheddar cheese is melted, 2 to 3 more minutes.
Stir oats, sugar, cinnamon, nutmeg, ginger, allspice, and cloves together in a slow cooker; add water, apple slices, vegetable oil, and molasses. Stir the mixture thoroughly. Cook on Low 5 to 7 hours.
Whisk water, milk, brown sugar, honey, and 1/4 cup vegetable oil together in a bowl. Add whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour, yeast, and salt; stir until dough holds together. Turn dough onto a floured surface and knead until smooth. Pour 1 tablespoon vegetable oil into a bowl. Place dough into the bowl and turn to evenly coat with oil. Allow dough to rise until doubled in size, about 1 hour. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Punch dough and knead 4 to 5 times. Divide dough in half and form each half into a loaf. Place loaves into 9x5-inch loaf pans. Allow to rise until dough is about 1 inch above the pan, about 30 minutes. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, 20 to 25 minutes. Cool slightly before slicing.
Blend cottage cheese, oats, egg whites, and vanilla extract together in a blender until smooth. Spray a griddle or skillet with cooking spray and place over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 4x8-inch loaf pans. Combine flour, baking soda, baking powder, cinnamon, and salt together in a bowl. Beat brown sugar and butter together in a separate bowl using an electric mixer until smooth and creamy. Stir flour mixture, alternating with bananas, into creamed butter mixture just until batter is mixed; fold in carrots and walnuts. Pour into the prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of a loaf comes out clean, 50 to 60 minutes.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F. Prepare Idahoan Steakhouse Cheesy Hashbrown Potatoes, following packaging directions, replacing the 1/2 cup milk with 1/2 cup buttermilk. In a medium size skillet, cook bacon and onion until bacon is crisp. Drain and set aside to cool slightly. Stir in eggs, Swiss cheese, and bacon-onion mixture. Bake uncovered for 25 minutes. Sprinkle crunchy onion topping on top of potatoes. Let stand 5 minutes then serve.
Mix oats, yogurt, almond milk, peaches, stevia, chia seeds, cinnamon, and almond extract together in a sealable glass jar or container. Cover the container and refrigerate 8 hours to overnight. Top with pecans.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease or line 24 muffin cups with paper liners. Combine zucchini, bananas, applesauce, brown sugar, oil, lemon juice, and vanilla extract together in a large bowl. Whisk flour, baking soda, 1 tablespoon cinnamon, nutmeg, baking powder, salt, and cloves together in a separate bowl. Slowly add flour mixture to zucchini mixture while continuously stirring until batter is just combined. Spoon batter into prepared muffin cups about 3/4-full. Mix white sugar and 1 teaspoon cinnamon together in a small bowl; sprinkle over batter. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of a muffin comes out clean, about 30 minutes.
Blend bananas, yogurt, ice cubes, peanut butter, milk, and sugar together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat, and cook and stir asparagus until tender, about 10 minutes. Season with a pinch of salt. Stir Canadian bacon, grated onion, and garlic into the asparagus; cook and stir until the garlic is fragrant, about 1 minute. Remove skillet from heat, cover, and set aside. Whisk eggs, cream, biscuit mix, butter, Parmesan cheese, Dijon mustard, 1/2 teaspoon salt, black pepper, and hot sauce together in a bowl. Place the pie crust into a 9-inch pie dish; spread asparagus mixture into the crust. Spread Colby-Monterey Jack cheese over the asparagus mixture in an even layer, and pour the egg mixture slowly over the quiche. Bake in the preheated oven until the filling is lightly puffed and browned and a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 40 minutes.
If quinoa is not pre-rinsed, rinse in plenty of cool water to remove coating, and drain. Bring 2 cups of water to a boil in a saucepan, and stir in the quinoa; reduce heat to low, and simmer until tender, 15 to 20 minutes. Drain excess water, and mix in the cinnamon and 1 teaspoon of nutmeg. Mix the chopped peach with yogurt in a bowl. Serve quinoa in a serving bowl, topped with about 2 tablespoons of the peach yogurt. Drizzle with a teaspoon or so of honey, sprinkle with nutmeg, and drizzle about a teaspoon of lime juice over the top.
Heat the olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Cook the portobello mushroom and red onion in the olive oil until the mushroom has softened, 3 to 5 minutes. Whisk the egg whites and water together in a small bowl; pour over the mushroom and onion mixture. Season the egg whites with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, until the egg whites are no longer runny, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle the mozzarella cheese over the mixture; top with the pesto. Fold the omelette in half and continue cooking until the cheese melts, 2 to 3 minutes.
Blend the strawberries, orange pieces, apple juice, vanilla yogurt, and almonds together in a blender until smooth.
Place the bacon in a large, deep skillet; cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on a paper towel-lined plate. Reduce heat to medium.  Place the bananas cut side down and cook one minute.  Flip with a spatula and cook an additional minute.  Drain the banana slices on a paper towel-lined plate.  Serve warm with bacon.
Combine the cream cheese substitute, sugar, vanilla extract, and coconut milk with an electric mixer until smooth and creamy.
Bring the water with the prune and raisins to a boil in a pot; cook at a boil for 3 minutes. Stir the oat bran, wheat bran, wheat germ, flax seed, and honey into the fruit mixture. Remove from heat and serve hot.
Stir soy milk, water, quinoa, blueberries, chia seeds, and honey together in a slow cooker. Cook on Low 6 to 8 hours.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a 5x9-inch loaf pan. Beat sugar and butter together in a large bowl with an electric mixer until creamy. Beat in eggs, one at a time, until light and fluffy. Stir in peach puree. Add flour, baking soda, baking powder, cinnamon, salt, and almond extract; stir until blended. Fold in pecans. Pour batter into prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, 50 to 60 minutes. Cool bread in the loaf pan for 10 minutes before removing and cooling completely on a wire rack.
Mix half-and-half, sugar, and pumpkin pie spice together in a coffee mug. Pour coffee into mug; stir to blend. Heat in microwave until hot, about 15 seconds. Top with whipped cream.
Heat vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Stir potatoes into hot oil to coat; season with garlic powder and onion powder. Place a cover on the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally, until the potatoes are browned and tender, about 15 minutes. Drain excess oil. Mash braunschweiger into the potato mixture. Cook and stir until the braunschweiger is hot and slightly crisp, about 5 minutes. Season with salt and pepper to serve.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Spread pecans in a single layer on a baking sheet. Bake pecans in the preheated oven until golden, 5 to 7 minutes. Remove pecans from oven and reduce oven temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Mix flour, brown sugar, cinnamon, baking soda, baking powder, nutmeg, and salt together in a large bowl. Stir applesauce, water, vegetable oil, and vinegar together in a separate bowl. Stir applesauce mixture into flour mixture until just combined; fold in pecans. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of the bread comes out clean, 50 to 60 minutes. Cool bread in the pan for 10 minutes before transferring to a wire rack to cool completely.
Heat oven to 350 degrees F. Melt 3 Tbsp. butter. Add to whole eggs and milk in large bowl; whisk until blended. Add flour, 2 Tbsp. sugar and salt; mix well. Heat 8-inch heavy skillet sprayed with cooking spray on medium-high heat. Add 1/4 cup batter; immediately tilt skillet to evenly cover bottom with batter. Cook 1 to 2 min. or until bottom is lightly browned; turn. Cook 20 sec. Transfer crepe to plate. Repeat with remaining batter to make a total of 8 crepes. Cook and stir mushrooms in 1 Tbsp. of the remaining butter in large skillet 3 to 5 min. or until tender. Add remaining butter and egg whites; cook 3 to 5 min. or until eggs are set, stirring occasionally. Top crepes with cheese, mushrooms, scrambled eggs and onions; fold in half. Place in 13x9-inch baking dish. Bake 5 min. or until cheese is melted.
If using raw asparagus: place a steamer basket or insert and two cups of water into a small stock pot. Bring water to a boil and then add the asparagus.  Cook until tender but still firm, about 5 minutes. Drain and let cool. Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Split dinner rolls in half and set top half aside. Tear bottom half of rolls into pieces and spread evenly in pan. Layer asparagus, cheese and ham over bread pieces. Arrange remaining half of rolls on top of other ingredients. Beat together eggs, milk, onion, salt and pepper. Pour egg mixture into pan and refrigerate over night. Remove pan from refrigerator 30 minutes before baking and preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake uncovered until a knife inserted into center of pan comes out clean, about 55 minutes. Let stand about 10 minutes before cutting.
In a large skillet, cook sausage over medium heat. When sausage is half cooked through, drain off most of the fat. Add onion, red pepper, mushrooms and cilantro; cook until vegetables are tender and sausage is browned. Remove sausage and vegetables from pan, leaving a slight coating of oil. Whisk together 5 eggs, egg whites, 1/4 cup milk and cheese. Return skillet to medium-high heat and pour in egg mixture. Cook, stirring occasionally, until eggs are set. Remove from heat but keep warm. In a double boiler, over medium heat, combine egg yolks, butter and lemon juice.  Whisk continuously (watch the heat or it will curdle).  Remove from burner when butter has completely melted. In a mixing bowl, whisk together flour, egg and milk.  Pour mixture through a fine sieve to eliminate lumps. Heat a non-stick crepe pan on medium-high heat.  Spray with cooking spray and pour about 1/3 cup of batter in the pan.  Rotate the pan to spread a paper thin amount of batter around the pan.  Flip when it starts to bubble and cook until golden on both sides. Repeat until all batter is used. To assemble: Place one crepe on a plate, spoon eggs and sausage mixture down the middle of the crepe from top to bottom (like a taco) and fold over in a half circle.  Top with Hollandaise sauce and sprinkle with a little paprika.  Serve with a scoop of salsa on the side.
Boil the potatoes in a large saucepan until they are soft, but not mushy. Drain and return to the pan. In a large skillet, brown the sausage until there is no pink left.  Drain and set aside. Coat a small skillet with vegetable cooking spray.  Over medium heat, scramble the eggs. Mix potatoes, sausage and scrambled eggs thoroughly and place into the flour tortillas.
Place the eggs into a saucepan in a single layer and fill with water to cover the eggs by 1 inch. Cover the saucepan and bring the water to a boil over high heat. Once the water is boiling, remove from the heat and let the eggs stand in the hot water for 15 minutes. Pour out the hot water, then cool the eggs under cold running water in the sink. Peel cold eggs. Separate yolks and egg whites. Chop them separately; set aside. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 1 1/2 quart baking dish. Melt butter over low heat and gently stir in flour. Gradually blend in cream, stir constantly as it thickens. Season with salt, pepper and cayenne to taste. Mix egg whites with cream sauce and pour into prepared baking dish. Cover with half of the bread crumbs. Sprinkle yolks on top, then finish with another layer of crumbs. Bake in preheated oven until bubbly, 30 to 40 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Pour warm water into a mixing bowl. Stir in yeast, salt, sugar, and oregano. Mix in 1 cup flour, and then stir in remaining flour. Cover with plastic wrap, and set aside to rest for 10  to 15 minutes. While dough is resting, prepare topping. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium heat until evenly brown. Stir in green onions, and cook for 1 minute. Add eggs to the pan; cook, stirring frequently, until mixture has the consistency of scrambled eggs. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Spread dough out evenly onto a lightly greased pizza tray, and spread pizza sauce over dough. Top with bacon and eggs, Parmesan cheese, and salami. Bake for 20 to 25 minutes, or until golden brown on top.
Warm the milk in a small saucepan until it bubbles, then remove from heat. Mix in the sugar, salt and shortening; stir until melted. Let cool until lukewarm. In a small bowl, dissolve yeast in warm water. Let stand until creamy, about 10 minutes. In a large bowl, combine the yeast mixture with the cooled milk mixture and egg; stir well to combine. In a separate bowl, combine carrots, raisins, 2 cups flour, cinnamon, allspice and cloves. Mix together with your fingers until carrots and raisins are coated and separated. Stir in the remaining flour, 1/2 cup at a time, beating well after each addition. When the dough has pulled together, turn it out onto a lightly floured surface and knead until smooth and elastic, about 8 minutes. Lightly oil a large bowl, place the dough in the bowl and turn to coat with oil. Cover with a damp cloth and let rise in a warm place until doubled in volume, about 1 1/2 hour. Deflate dough and allow to rise again until nearly doubled, about 30 minutes. Deflate the dough and turn it out onto a lightly floured surface. Divide the dough into two equal pieces and form into loaves. (At this point, you may divide the dough into 12 pieces and form into rolls if you wish.) Place the loaves into two lightly greased 9x5 inch loaf pans. Cover the loaves with a damp cloth and let rise until doubled in volume, about 40 minutes. Meanwhile, preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Bake in preheated oven until crust is golden and loaf sounds hollow when tapped.
Pour coffee into the container of a blender, and add ricotta cheese, sweetener, coffee creamer, vanilla and cocoa. Place ice cubes on the top. Blend until smooth, and pour into glasses.
Microwave water until very hot, 3 to 4 minutes. Meanwhile, heat oil in a large saucepan over medium-high heat. Add prosciutto; saute until moisture evaporates and bits start to fry and crisp, about 3 minutes. Remove prosciutto; set aside. Add the hot water to the empty pan and bring to a boil. Whisk in grits and salt. Simmer, uncovered, over medium-low heat until thick, about 3 to 5 minutes. Stir in prosciutto, cheese, butter and pepper to taste. Let stand to cool and allow flavors to blend, 2 to 3 minutes. Serve.
In a small bowl, stir together the crabmeat and tuna. Place a layer of bread cubes in the bottom of a 1 1/2 quart casserole dish. Cover with a layer of the crab and tuna, then a layer of cheese and a sprinkle of parsley. Repeat layers 2 more times ending with cheese and parsley on top. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, butter, mustard powder and onion. Pour over the layers in the dish. Cover and refrigerate for at least 3 hours, or overnight. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Let the dish come to room temperature while the oven preheats. Bake uncovered for 1 hour and 15 minutes in the preheated oven, or until puffed and golden.
In a blender, combine milk, malt powder and banana. Blend until smooth. Pour into glasses and serve.
In a large bowl, combine chocolate drink mix, instant coffee, confectioners' sugar, powdered milk and nondairy creamer. Store in an airtight container. To serve, Stir 3 tablespoons mixture with 6 ounces boiling water.
Preheat oven to 225 degrees F (110 degrees C). Lightly grease a large baking sheet. In a large bowl, mix together wheat germ, sesame seeds, sunflower seeds, pumpkin seeds, cashews, almonds, coconut, rolled wheat and rolled oats. In a medium saucepan over medium heat, mix oil, honey and vanilla. Cook and stir just until the mixture is hot. Stir into the wheat germ mixture. Spread the mixture on the prepared baking sheet. Bake 1 1/2 hours in the preheated oven, stirring approximately every 20 minutes, until golden brown.
Prepare the filling by stirring Dijon mustard into chicken broth in a saucepan until dissolved. Bring to a simmer over medium-high heat, then add 1/4 cup cream and 2 tablespoons butter. Reduce heat to medium, and simmer until reduced by half, then stir in crab and shrimp; keep warm over low heat. Prepare the sauce by warming 1/4 cup cream, and 1 teaspoon mustard over medium heat. Once hot, whisk in the shredded cheese, then season to taste with nutmeg, salt, and pepper. Keep warm over low heat. Whisk eggs, 1/4 cup cream, salt, and pepper together until smooth. Heat an 8-inch non-stick skillet over medium heat, and lightly oil with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 cup of the egg mixture into hot pan, and swirl to make a thin, even layer of egg. Cook until firmed, then flip and cook for a few seconds more to firm the other side. To prepare omelets, spoon some of the seafood filling into the lower half of each omelet. Roll up into a cylinder. Serve 2 per person bathed with Cheddar sauce.
In a small saucepan, combine the soy milk, water, green tea powder and sugar. Warm over medium heat while whisking until hot and foamy. Pour into mugs and enjoy.
Place the coffee, milk, ice cream, cinnamon, and ice cubes in the bowl of a blender; puree until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x12-inch casserole. In a saucepan, bring water to boil. Stir in grits, reduce the heat to low, and simmer until thick, about 10 minutes. Stir in processed cheese, Cheddar cheese, and margarine. Season with salt, seasoned salt, hot pepper sauce, and white pepper. Stir in eggs; cook, stirring, until well blended. Stir in parsley flakes, chives, and green chiles. Pour into casserole. Bake in a preheated oven for 1 hour.
Pour the milk into a large saucepan with the salt, cayenne pepper, and black pepper, and bring to a boil over medium heat, stirring constantly to prevent scorching. Sprinkle in the grits, cover, and simmer for 20 to 25 minutes, stirring occasionally until thickened. Uncover the grits, and add 1 1/2 cups of shredded Cheddar cheese and the hot pepper sauce, beating the mixture with a spoon until the cheese melts and the mixture is smooth. Cover the cheese grits and set them aside to firm up. Heat the olive oil in a saucepan over medium heat, and cook and stir the onion and garlic for about 5 minutes, until the onion is translucent. Add the shrimp, and toss them in the hot oil for about 3 minutes, until the shrimp just turn pink and opaque. Stir in the garlic powder and diced tomatoes with chile peppers, and set the shrimp mixture aside. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C), and spray a 7x11-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Place about 1 cup of shrimp mixture in the bottom of the dish, followed by 1 cup of cheese grits in a layer. Continue layering shrimp and grits, and top the final layer with 1 cup Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven for 30 minutes, until the cheese topping is bubbling and beginning to brown. Let the casserole set for about 10 minutes before serving.
Toss the zucchini and salt together and place into a colander set in the sink. Allow to drain for 1 hour, then squeeze the liquid out of the zucchini, and set aside. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Prepare a 1 1/2 quart casserole dish with the melted butter. Whisk the eggs in a mixing bowl with the pepper, garlic powder, and parsley. Stir in the zucchini, Monterey Jack cheese, and baking mix until combined. Pour into the prepared casserole dish. Bake, uncovered, in the preheated oven until set and golden brown on top, 45 minutes to 1 hour. The souffle is done when a knife inserted into the center comes out clean.
Stir the brown rice and whole wheat flours together in a mixing bowl. Stir in the water to make a thin batter. Add the onion, garlic, cilantro, sugar, turmeric, cumin, mustard seeds, cumin seeds, coriander, ginger, cayenne pepper and rice vinegar until evenly blended. Cover, and refrigerate for at least 1/2 hour, or overnight. To cook the dosas, heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat. Pour 1/4 cup of batter into the skillet, spreading it over the bottom in a thin layer. Cook 1 minute, turn, and cook 1 minute more. Remove from the pan. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour 3 9x5 inch loaf pans, and set aside. Place the zucchini chunks into a saucepan, and cover with water. Bring to a boil and cook until the zucchini are tender, about 5 minutes. Drain the zucchini, place them in a blender, and blend until they are pureed, about 2 minutes. Let the zucchini puree cool for about 10 minutes. Mix the flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves in a bowl, and stir to eliminate lumps. Place the zucchini puree in a large bowl, and whisk in the oil, eggs, and sugar. Beat in the flour mixture to form a thick batter. Divide the batter evenly among the prepared loaf pans, and bake in the preheated oven until the tops are lightly browned and the loaves spring back when gently pressed, 45 minutes to 1 hour. A toothpick inserted into the center should come out clean. Cool in the pans for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Combine orange pieces, chocolate syrup, milk, and ice in a blender. Blend until smooth. Pour into a tall glass and enjoy.
In 12-inch nonstick skillet cook bacon and onions until browned. Remove from skillet. Reserve 1 tablespoon bacon grease. Set aside bacon and onions. Meanwhile, in large bowl stir together Simply Potatoes, baking mix, cheese, cooked bacon and onions. Stir in milk and egg just until moistened. Heat bacon grease in skillet over medium heat. Spoon four generous 1/4 cups of potato mixture into skillet at a time. Flatten slightly into pancakes. Cook each pancake about 2 minutes on each side or until golden brown. Use additional vegetable oil in skillet if needed.
Whisk together the eggs and milk in a bowl until smooth. Separate the bacon strips, and soak in the milk mixture for 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat oil in deep skillet to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Whisk together the flour, salt, and pepper in a separate bowl. Remove the bacon from the egg mixture, and toss with the flour to coat. Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil. Fry the bacon strips 3 to 5 slices at a time until golden brown, about 4 minutes. Drain on a paper towel-lined plate. Once all of the bacon has cooked, place onto the prepared baking sheet, and bake in the preheated oven until crispy, about 7 minutes.
Over medium-low heat melt butter in a large saucepan. Add bread cubes and toss to coat with butter. Stir in carrots, salt, parsley and chicken. Cook for 2 minutes, stirring occasionally. Beat together eggs and milk; stir in cheese. Pour egg mixture over bread mixture and stir briefly to combine. Cook until eggs are set, about 10 to 15 minutes.
Coat a large skillet with non-stick cooking spray. Cut each frankfurter into 5 or 6 pieces and cook in the skillet on a medium-high heat until browned. Remove and set aside. Spray the skillet again, return to heat and add the potatoes. Cover and cook on medium heat for 10 to 15 minutes, stirring occasionally. When the potatoes are tender and slightly browned, add the beans and cooked frankfurters to the skillet. Season with salt, pepper and hot sauce. Heat until warmed through.
In a medium bowl, mix together egg, milk and vanilla. In a large skillet, heat oil over medium high heat. Dip bread into egg mixture and slide into hot oil. Cook until golden brown, drain and serve.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease and flour two 9x5 inch loaf pans. Place peaches, peach juice and 6 tablespoons sugar in a blender; puree until smooth. In a large bowl, sift together flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt and cinnamon. In a large bowl, cream together the shortening and 1 1/2 cups sugar. Stir in the eggs one at a time, beating well with each addition, then stir in the vanilla.  Blend this mixture into the flour mixture, alternately with the peach puree; stir just to combine. Fold in the nuts. Pour batter into prepared pans. Bake at 325 degrees for 55 to 60 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted into the center of a loaf comes out clean. Cool 10 minutes in pans; turn out on rack and let cool completely.
In a large bowl, lightly beat eggs. Stir in chopped tomato, onion, green pepper and jalapeno. In a large skillet, melt butter over medium heat. Toss in the tortilla strips and cook briefly until soft. Add the egg and vegetable mixture and stir to combine. Cook, stirring occasionally, until eggs are set. Sprinkle with cheese and serve hot.
Combine the vinegar and the milk. Let stand for at least 15 minutes or until the mixture thickens. Add the vinegar mixture, brown sugar, egg, butter, salt, molasses, bread flour, baking soda, caraway seeds and yeast in the order directed by your bread machine's manufacturer. Set machine to basic cycle (fruit bread, white bread, etc depending on your bread machine), medium crust setting. Add the raisins when indicated to by your bread machine's manufacturer. Alternately this bread can be mixed in the bread machine and then bake in the oven. Set bread machine to dough setting. Remove dough, shape into a loaf, cover and let rise in a warm place, until just under doubled in size. This will take about 1 hour.  Bake the bread in a preheated 375 degrees F (190 degrees C) for 30 to 45 minutes. Bread will golden brown and sound hollow when thumped on the bottom.
Whisk all-purpose flour, oat flour, whole wheat flour, buttermilk, wheat germ, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a large bowl until well blended. Store in an airtight container for up to 6 months.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch casserole dish. Mix Cheddar cheese, potato soup, sour cream, cream cheese, green onions, garlic, and salt together in a large bowl. Fold potatoes into the mixture; pour prepared casserole dish. Top with Parmesan cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until bubbling and cheese is golden brown, about 1 hour.
Transfer each container of yogurt into a muffin cup and freeze solid, about 4 hours. Remove frozen yogurt; place 1 portion of frozen yogurt into a resealable plastic bag and add 1/2 cup strawberries, 1/2 cup blueberries, and half a banana to each bag. Store the bags in the freezer until serving time. Place contents of a bag into a blender and blend until smooth.
Dissolve cocoa powder in hot water in a saucepan; add milk and bring to a boil. Add salt and oats; simmer over low heat, stirring constantly, until oatmeal has thickened, about 15 minutes. Remove from heat; stir in honey.
Mix together almond flour, eggs, vanilla extract, cinnamon, applesauce, baking powder, and coconut milk in a bowl. Lightly oil a griddle and place over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges of pancake are dry. Flip and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter. Puree strawberries in a food processor until smooth. Top pancakes with pureed strawberries.
Whisk egg with 3 tablespoons melted butter, vanilla extract, and 1 tablespoon white sugar in a bowl until thoroughly combined; whisk in milk and cream. Sift flour with baking powder and salt in a separate bowl; stir flour mixture into liquid ingredients to make a smooth batter. Stir 1/4 cup white sugar with brown sugar and cinnamon in a small bowl. Melt 1 teaspoon butter in a skillet over medium-low heat. Scoop up about 3 tablespoons of batter and pour into skillet. Sprinkle top of pancake with about 2 teaspoons of cinnamon sugar in an even layer; cook pancake until bottom is golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip pancake over onto sugared side and cook until the cinnamon sugar melts into a crust, about 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter and cinnamon sugar. Let pancakes cool without stacking to avoid softening the sugar crust.
Whisk egg substitute, Cheddar cheese, Parmesan cheese, salt, black pepper, garlic powder, and red pepper flakes together in a bowl. Heat olive oil in a nonstick skillet over medium heat; cook and stir mushrooms and onion until tender, 4 to 5 minutes. Add spinach; cook until spinach wilts, 3 to 4 minutes. Pour in egg mixture; swirl pan around to evenly distribute egg mixture. Cook until egg is fully cooked and set in the middle, 5 to 10 minutes. Cut into wedges.
Place bacon in a large, deep skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain and cool bacon slices on a paper towel-lined plate; crumble. Reserve bacon drippings in skillet. Heat a stovetop grill over medium heat and cook shrimp until pink and no longer translucent in the center, 8 to 10 minutes. Place cooked shrimp, green onion, garlic, and crumbled bacon in the bacon drippings left in the skillet. Turn heat to low and keep shrimp mixture warm. Bring water to a boil in a large saucepan, melt butter in the water, stir in grits, and cook covered for 5 minutes. Turn heat to low. Stir shrimp mixture with bacon drippings into the grits; stir in Cheddar cheese until thoroughly melted and combined. Serve topped with barbeque sauce.
Cook the bacon in a large, deep skillet over medium-high heat until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on a paper towel-lined plate. Crumble the bacon and set aside. Place a steamer insert into a saucepan and fill with water to just below the bottom of the steamer. Cover and bring the water to a boil. Add the asparagus, cover, and steam until bright green but still crunchy, about 5 minutes. Remove asparagus and set aside. In a large bowl, whisk together eggs, milk, dry mustard, salt, and pepper until smooth and well combined. Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Layer the bread slices into the bottom of the dish, cutting and fitting extra slices as needed to fill spaces. Sprinkle 1 cup of Cheddar cheese over the bread, followed by the diced onion. Arrange asparagus spears and red bell pepper in a layer over the onion. Sprinkle crumbled bacon over the red bell pepper; top with another layer of bread slices, cutting and filling in spaces as before. Pour the egg-milk mixture evenly over the casserole, and refrigerate overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake the casserole for 50 minutes; sprinkle 1 cup shredded Cheddar cheese over the top of the casserole, return to the oven, and bake until the cheese is melted and bubbling and a knife inserted into the center of the casserole comes out clean, 10 to 15 more minutes.
Preheat the oven's broiler and set the oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source. Heat the olive oil in a cast-iron skillet over medium heat, and spread the potatoes into the hot pan in an even layer.  Cover the skillet, and cook the potatoes until they start to turn tender, about 10 minutes. Stir in the red peppers and garlic, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook and stir the potato mixture until the garlic begins to soften, about 2 minutes, sprinkle on the basil, and cook the mixture, stirring occasionally, until the basil is cooked, about 2 more minutes. Whisk the eggs and cream together in a bowl, and pour the egg mixture over the vegetables in the skillet. Sprinkle the top with goat cheese, cover the skillet, and reduce the heat to low. Cook until the eggs are set but not dry, 3 to 5 minutes. Uncover the skillet, and place it under the broiler until the top of the frittata has browned, about 2 minutes.
Place the water, milk, eggs, melted butter, 1/2 teaspoon of salt, 1 teaspoon of vanilla extract, and flour in the container of a blender, and blend until the mixture forms a smooth batter, about 1 minute. Pour into a bowl, and refrigerate at least 1 hour. Clean the blender container, then add the cottage cheese, farmers cheese, sour cream, sugar, 1 teaspoon of vanilla extract, and 1 pinch of salt. Pulse the filling mixture a few times to combine, then blend until the filling is smooth, about 2 minutes. Melt 1 teaspoon of  butter in an 8-inch skillet over medium heat until the foam disappears from the skillet. Pour about 2 tablespoons of batter into the heated skillet, and swirl the pan to coat the bottom completely. Cook until the crepe is opaque and set, 1 to 2 minutes, and set aside, uncooked side down, on a plate lined with wax paper. Repeat with the rest of the batter, buttering the pan every few crepes if needed. To fill, place a crepe in front of you on a work surface with the cooked side up, and place about 1 1/2 tablespoons of cheese filling about 1 1/2 inches from the top of the crepe. Fold the top edge of the crepe over the filling, and fold the two sides inward to completely enclose the cheese. Roll the crepe over to seal the filling in, making a compact filled roll. Melt 1 teaspoon of butter, or as needed, in a skillet over medium-low heat. Pan fry the blintzes on both sides until the filling is hot and brown spots appear on the crepe, 1 to 2 minutes per side.
Melt the butter in a skillet over medium heat. Cook the onion, garlic scapes, and ham in the melted butter until the onion is tender, about 5 minutes. Beat the eggs, milk, salt, and pepper together in a small bowl; pour into the skillet and cook, stirring continually, until the eggs have nearly set, but are still slightly moist. Add about half the Cheddar cheese; cook and stir until the eggs are completely cooked, about 5 minutes. Top with the remaining Cheddar cheese to serve.
Preheat an oven to 250 degrees F (120 degrees C). Combine the thawed strawberries with their juice and the blueberries in a bowl; set aside. Beat together the softened cream cheese and confectioner's sugar until smooth; set aside. Whisk the milk, eggs, vanilla, and cinnamon in a shallow bowl. Melt butter over medium heat in a large skillet or griddle. Dip bread into egg mixture, coating thoroughly. Cook until well-browned on both sides, about 5 minutes. Place cooked slices on baking sheet and place in oven to keep warm until ready to serve. Spread the cream cheese mixture over each slice of french toast, then top with 2 tablespoons of the fruit. Serve immediately.
Preheat a pancake griddle to medium heat. Whisk together the pancake mix and water in a bowl. Place the still-frozen strawberries into a blender, and pulse several times to break the berries up into small pieces. Mix the chopped strawberries and the frozen blueberries into the batter until the fruit is well distributed. Grease the griddle with butter, and pour about 1/4 cup of batter per pancake onto the griddle. Allow the bottom side to brown and the batter to form air holes; sprinkle the uncooked side with brown sugar, if desired, and flip to brown the other side.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Whisk together the flour, baking powder, salt, and sugar; set aside. Beat the eggs in a mixing bowl with the milk, vegetable oil, and food color. Stir the flour into the egg mixture until only slight lumps remain. Pour batter into waffle iron in batches, and cook until crisp and golden brown. Sprinkle with confectioners' sugar to serve.
Blend milk, eggs, 1 tablespoon melted butter, white sugar, almond extract, and flour in a blender into a smooth batter, 1 to 2 minutes. Allow the batter to rest while you finish the remaining steps, at least 20 minutes. Cook the bacon in a large, deep skillet over medium-high heat until evenly browned, about 10 minutes; drain on a paper towel-lined plate. Melt 1 teaspoon butter on a crepe pan or in a non-stick skillet over medium heat. Pour in 1/4 cup of batter, swirl the pan to evenly coat the entire bottom of the pan with the thin batter, and cook until small brown spots appear on the bottom of the crepe, 2 to 3 minutes. Carefully loosen crepe from the pan and gently flip to cook other side, 1 to 2 more minutes. Crepe is done when the batter in the center is set and a few small brown spots appear on the 2nd side. Slide crepe onto a plate lined with a piece of parchment paper. Cook remaining crepes, buttering the pan when needed, and stack cooked crepes between pieces of parchment paper. Melt remaining 2 tablespoons butter in a skillet and cook the sliced bananas until golden brown on both sides, about 3 minutes per side. Set bananas aside. To assemble, place a crepe onto a serving plate and spread 1 tablespoon of chocolate hazelnut spread and 1 tablespoon peanut butter over the crepe. Place a bacon strip in the center of the crepe and top bacon with a banana half. Drizzle about 1/2 teaspoon of honey over the banana half. Roll up the crepe into a cylinder shape; dust with confectioners' sugar and a drizzle of chocolate syrup. Repeat with remaining ingredients to make 12 filled crepes.
Preheat an oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease two 4x8-inch loaf pans. Mix the cider vinegar and milk together in a small bowl; set aside. Cream together the butter and sugar in a large bowl with an electric mixer. Beat in the sliced bananas until well incorporated, then stir in the milk mixture. Mix in the flour and baking soda until just combined, then mix in the walnuts and eggs until evenly distributed. Divide the batter evenly between the two prepared pans. Place the pans on a baking sheet for easier handling. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 45 minutes. Cool in the pans for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack. Wrap in plastic wrap and store in refrigerator.
Blend oats and chia seeds together in a blender to a fine consistency. Add strawberries, yogurt, banana, almond milk, and vanilla extract; blend until smooth.
Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat. Flatten bread slices using a rolling pin. Mix bananas and cream cheese together in a bowl; add sugar and cinnamon and mix well. Whisk eggs in a separate bowl. Spread about 2 1/2 tablespoons banana mixture onto 1 end of each flattened bread slice. Roll bread slice around filling. Dip bread rolls in the egg until coated and place in the hot skillet, working in batches if needed. Cook French toast rolls in the hot oil until browned, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Repeat with remaining rolls.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray two 9x5-inch loaf pans with cooking spray. Beat pumpkin puree, white sugar, brown sugar, eggs, vegetable oil, vanilla extract, and pumpkin pie spice together in a bowl; add flour and beat until batter forms. Fold chocolate chips into batter; divide between the 2 prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, about 1 hour. Cool bread in pans for 15 minutes before removing.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Prepare an 8-inch square baking dish with cooking spray. Spread oats into the prepared baking dish. Beat milk, eggs, brown sugar, vegetable oil, vanilla extract, cinnamon, and salt together in a large bowl until smooth; pour over oats. Bake in preheated oven until oats are softened and mixture thickened, 50 to 55 minutes.
Heat waffle iron according to directions. Mix together apple (or cherry) pie filling and water in a saucepan; heat until warm over medium heat. Keep warm. Mix flour, salt, baking powder, sugar, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves in a large bowl. In a separate bowl, mix together eggs, milk, melted butter, applesauce, and vanilla. Add dry ingredients and stir to blend. Batter will be thick. Brush waffle iron generously with oil or melted butter, or spray with an oil spray. Ladle batter into the preheated oiled waffle iron. Cook until crispy, generally 4-6 minutes. Top with warm pie filling and a dollop of whipped cream.
Stir baking mix, milk, sugar, egg, and vanilla extract together in a bowl until batter is smooth; fold in banana and chocolate chips until just combined. Heat a non-stick pan over medium-high heat. Sprinkle a few drops water in skillet; they will dance and disappear when skillet is ready. Spoon just under 1/4 cup batter into the pan; cook until bubbles appear on the top of each pancake and bottom is golden brown, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip each pancake and cook until bottom is golden brown, 3 to 4 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 200 degrees F (95 degrees C). Whisk 2 cups milk and vinegar together in a bowl; let rest until milk sours, about 2 minutes. Sift flour, white sugar, cocoa powder, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a large bowl; whisk to combine. Whisk milk mixture, melted unsalted butter, eggs, red food coloring, and 2 teaspoons vanilla extract together in a bowl. Pour milk mixture into flour mixture and stir until just combined; the batter should be lumpy. Heat a cast-iron skillet over medium-low heat and spray with cooking spray. Drop batter by 1/4-cup onto the skillet and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Transfer cooked pancakes to a baking sheet and keep warm in the preheated oven. Beat cream cheese and softened butter together in a bowl until light and fluffy, about 2 minutes. Add 1 cup confectioners' sugar, 1/4 milk, and 1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract; beat until smooth, adding more milk to reach desired consistency. Pour cream cheese glaze over pancakes and dust with remaining confectioners' sugar.
Whisk flour, white sugar, baking powder, cocoa powder, and salt together in a bowl. Beat buttermilk, melted butter, eggs, 2 teaspoons vanilla extract, and vinegar together in a bowl until smooth. Stir red food coloring into buttermilk mixture. Mix buttermilk mixture into flour mixture until just combined. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Beat cream cheese and softened butter together in a bowl using an electric mixer until smooth and fluffy. Gradually mix 2 cups confectioners' sugar into cream cheese mixture, alternating with milk and 1 teaspoon vanilla extract, until glaze is smooth. Spoon 1/4 to 1/2 cup waffle batter into preheated waffle iron. Cook according to manufacturer's directions. Repeat with remaining batter. Lightly dust each waffle with remaining confectioners' sugar, drizzle with glaze, and top each with whipped cream and strawberries.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x9-inch baking dish. Heat butter in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir leeks and potato in the melted butter until softened, 8 to 10 minutes. Spoon leek mixture into the prepared baking dish. Beat eggs, mozzarella cheese, Parmesan-Reggiano cheese, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Pour egg mixture over leek mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set, 20 to 25 minutes.
Blend milk, bananas, pistachios, and honey in a blender until smooth and frothy, about 2 minutes.
Stir water, diced apples, oats, apple juice, and cinnamon together in a slow cooker. Cook on Low, stirring hourly, until the oats are tender and the mixture reaches your preferred consistency, 4 to 6 hours.
Blend banana, egg, and arrowroot powder in a blender until well mixed. Heat a griddle or large skillet over medium heat. Divide batter into two portions; ladle onto griddle. Cook until bubbles form, 2 to 3 minutes; flip and brown on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a muffin tin with paper liners. Pulse sausage into small pieces a mini food processor, about 5 times. Whisk eggs in a large bowl; season with salt and pepper. Fold in sausage, fontina cheese, scallions, parsley, basil, oregano, garlic powder, and red pepper flakes. Fill lined muffin cups evenly with egg mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, 15 to 17 minutes.
Build a campfire and allow the fire to burn until it has accumulated a bed of coals. Rake the coals into a flat bed on one side of the fire. Alternatively, preheat an outdoor grill. Place apples in a loaf pan. Combine brown sugar and cinnamon in a bowl; spoon into each apple. Place the loaf pan into the campfire or on the grill; cook for about 3 minutes. Carefully remove the pan from the fire and sprinkle bacon over apples. Place in the fire or on the grill for about 5 minutes more.
Beat eggs in a bowl with an electric mixer until thick and lemon-colored, 3 to 5 minutes. Stir in milk. Sift flour, sugar, and salt together in a bowl. Add to egg mixture; mix until batter is smooth. Grease a griddle with butter; heat over medium heat. Drop tablespoonfuls of batter on the griddle; spread to make thin pancakes. Cook until light brown on bottom, 1 to 2 minutes. Flip and continue cooking until second side is light brown, 1 to 2 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Pour water into a microwave-safe cup or bowl; add vinegar. Cracks eggs into the cup. Cook eggs in the microwave for 1 minute 20 seconds. Drain.
Blend milk, banana, peanut butter, cocoa powder, and honey together in a blender until smooth.
Whisk milk, eggs, sugar, rum extract, salt, cinnamon, nutmeg, cloves, and ginger together in a bowl. Dip each bread slice into the egg mixture, turning to coat both sides. Melt butter in a non-stick skillet over medium heat. Add bread slices in a single layer and cook until golden brown, about 3 minutes per side.
Blend milk, avocado, and sugar together in a blender until smooth.
Heat oil in a large saucepan to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Oil should be at least one-inch deep. Mix flour, baking powder, and salt together in a large bowl. Add water a little at a time until dough comes together into a ball and doesn't stick to your hands, about 5 minutes. Tear off plum-sized pieces of dough and flatten into 1/2-inch disks. Fry pieces of dough in the hot oil until brown on both sides, about 3 minutes. Drain on paper towels or napkins before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain on paper towels. Cook and stir onion in the same skillet until soft and translucent, about 5 minutes. Remove and set aside. Heat olive oil in the skillet. Pour in eggs and cook, stirring occasionally, until set, 3 to 5 minutes. Place pita bread on lined baking sheet. Spread pesto over pita; top with bacon, scrambled eggs, tomato, mushrooms, and spinach. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese over toppings. Bake in the preheated oven until cheese has melted, about 10 minutes. Serve garnished with avocado slices.
Whisk eggs together in a bowl; stir in bacon. Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Add egg mixture; cook and stir until eggs are completely set, 2 to 3 minutes. Stir in American cheese, salt, and pepper. Wrap tortillas in damp paper towels; microwave until warmed through, 30 seconds to 1 minute. Spoon 1/4 cup egg mixture into the center of each tortilla; fold sides to cover. Serve with salsa.
Blend banana, avocado, soy milk, berries, cocoa powder, agave nectar, and vanilla extract together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8-inch square baking dish. Whisk eggs, oil, and brown sugar together in a bowl until brown sugar is dissolved. Combine oats, baking powder, cinnamon, and salt in a separate bowl; stir into egg mixture just until moistened. Spoon oat mixture into prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until edges are golden brown, 20 to 25 minutes.
Blend almond milk, banana, peanut butter, and cocoa powder together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line two 9x5-inch loaf pans with parchment paper. Process pecan halves in a food processor until a flour forms; transfer to a bowl. Process oats in the food processor until a flour forms; add to pecan flour. Mix bananas and sugar together in a bowl; add to pecan flour mixture. Stir white whole wheat flour, baking powder, coconut oil, and salt into pecan flour mixture until batter is thick and well mixed. Spoon batter into prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of a loaf comes out clean, about 45 minutes.
Stir mashed potatoes, flour, milk, egg, butter, and sea salt together in a bowl. Add shredded potatoes, Cheddar cheese, and zucchini; stir until batter is well-combined. Heat 1 to 1 1/2 tablespoons oil in a non-stick skillet over medium-high heat. Working in batches, drop batter by heaping tablespoons into hot oil. Cook, turning once, until golden-brown on each side, 3 to 4 minutes per side. Repeat with remaining oil and batter.
Layer banana, blueberries, almond butter, coconut, and water in a blender; blend until smooth, adding more water for a thinner smoothie.
Slice cinnamon rolls into 1-inch squares. Whisk milk, eggs, vanilla extract, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Slice 1 banana and layer on bottom of a 9x13-inch baking dish; top with brown sugar. Layer cinnamon roll squares on top of banana. Pour egg mixture over cinnamon rolls; press cinnamon rolls with a spatula to allow egg mixture to fully coat. Cover with aluminum foil and refrigerate until egg mixture is absorbed, 1 hour to overnight. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake in preheated oven until firm, about 50 minutes. Remove aluminum foil and bake until golden brown, about 10 minutes more. Remove from oven and let stand for 10 minutes. Slice remaining banana and place on top to serve.
Combine ricotta cheese and coconut milk in a bowl. Drizzle on honey and sprinkle with almonds and coconut. Top with blueberries.
Place potatoes on a microwave-safe plate and prick skins with a fork. Cook in the microwave until slightly tender, 7 to 8 minutes. Cut into 1-inch cubes. Combine potatoes, roast beef, onion, green bell pepper, and mushrooms in a bowl. Preheat an electric skillet to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Coat with oil. Spread potato mixture evenly in the skillet. Let cook, without stirring, until browned, about 5 minutes. Flip and continue cooking until second side is crisp, about 5 minutes more.
Rinse salmon with water; pat dry with paper towels. Mix salt and sugar together in a bowl. Lay out a piece of plastic wrap. Pour half of the salt mixture onto the plastic wrap; lay salmon on top. Cover salmon with remaining salt mixture. Fold plastic wrap around salmon until secure; wrap a second layer of plastic wrap around salmon. Transfer to a 9x9-inch baking pan; cover with an 8x8-inch baking pan. Place a heavy object onto the smaller baking pan to weigh salmon down. Cure in the refrigerator until salmon's surface becomes silky, about 48 hours. Combine water and ice in a bowl. Mix water and 3 drops liquid smoke together in a bowl. Place salmon into liquid smoke mixture to rinse. Submerge into ice bath for 30 minutes. Repeat rinsing and submerging 2 more times, adding 3 drops of liquid smoke to the rinse water each time. Dry salmon with paper towels. Cut with a sharp knife staring from the thin edge of the salmon and cutting toward the thick edge.
Cook the steak in the cast iron skillet over medium heat, flipping half way through until entirely cooked through. Remove to a plate and reserve the drippings in the skillet. Add the potatoes to the skillet and season with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, until tender, (8 to 12 minutes). Add the onion and cook until lightly browned and the potatoes are cooked through, (3 to 5 minutes). Cut steak into pieces and return to skillet, reduce the heat to low. Make 4 shallow wells in the potato mixture and crack an egg into each one. Scatter the tomatoes throughout the skillet and cover; cooking until the egg whites are set but the yolks are still runny ( 6 to 12 minutes) Season the eggs with salt and pepper, sprinkle with Italian Seasoning, and enjoy!
Add Quaker(R) Oats to your container of choice and pour in milk. Layer Greek yogurt, chia seeds and mixed fruit and berries. Refrigerate overnight and enjoy in the morning!
Combine milk, water, butter, and salt in a saucepan over medium-high heat. Bring to a boil, stirring gently. Remove from heat. Pour in semolina flour in a steady stream, whisking constantly to prevent lumps. Place saucepan back over medium heat; whisk until porridge comes to a boil, about 2 minutes. Reduce heat to low and cover; cook until porridge thickens, about 20 minutes. Remove saucepan from heat; stir in sugar. Let porridge stand for 3 to 5 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F. Cook sausage according to package directions. In a bowl, combine the brown sugar and cinnamon; mix well.  Add the eggs, milk and vanilla; whisk until combined. Using a rolling pin, roll out bread to flatten. Place one breakfast link on the edge of a bread slice; roll up jelly roll style. Dip in egg mixture to coat. Place on a greased baking sheet and sprinkle with cinnamon sugar. Repeat for remaining sausage. Bake for 15 to 20 minutes or until crisp and lightly browned. Place cream cheese in a resealable plastic bag.  Cut the corner off and pipe cream cheese onto the top of each French Toast Sausage Stick. Serve with maple syrup.
Steep the tea bags in boiling water for 3 to 5 minutes. Discard tea bags and let the tea cool. Put cooled tea and remaining ingredients in blender and process until smooth. Drink immediately.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain on paper towels; crumble into small pieces. Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Add onion; cook and stir until translucent and starting to brown, 7 to 8 minutes. Remove from heat; transfer to a bowl. Roll out pizza dough into a 12-inch circle and press into the bottom and 1 inch up the sides of a well seasoned 10-inch cast iron skillet. Fold the edges of the dough under and crimp like a pie. Mix ricotta cheese and garlic powder together in a bowl; spread over the bottom of the crust. Scatter bacon, onion, mozzarella cheese, and black pepper on top. Place cast iron skillet over high heat until mozzarella cheese starts to melt, about 3 minutes. Transfer skillet to the preheated oven; bake pizza until crust is lightly browned, about 18 minutes. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat and coat with cooking spray. Add spinach; cook, stirring frequently, until wilted, about 1 minute. Transfer to paper towels to drain excess moisture. Place spinach over pizza; slice into 8 wedges.
Combine gluten-free flour, baking powder, cinnamon, pumpkin pie spice, and salt in a large bowl. Whisk eggs in a separate bowl. Whisk in almond milk, coconut oil, pumpkin puree, maple syrup, and vanilla extract. Fold in flour mixture until batter is just blended. Preheat waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Let batter rest, about 10 minutes. Stir batter. Scoop 1/2 cup batter onto the preheated iron and spread to the edges. Close iron and cook until iron stops steaming, about 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Beat eggs together with milk, salt, and pepper in a bowl. Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add mushrooms; cook and stir until softened, about 5 minutes. Mix in green onions; cook until slightly softened, about 1 minute. Pour in the beaten eggs. Cook and stir until the edges harden, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and sprinkle Cheddar cheese on top. Cook until egg is set and cheese is melted, 1 to 2 minutes. Fold omelet in half; top with more Cheddar cheese.
Bring oats and heavy cream to a simmer in a pot over medium-high heat. Stir and cook for 1 minute and turn off the heat. Let cool down to room temperature, at least 10 minutes. Transfer oat mixture into a bowl. Add lemon zest and lemon juice. Drizzle in honey and crack in an egg. Add salt and baking soda. Mix thoroughly with a spatula. Stir in flour until no dry spots remain. Cover and let rest for at least 1 hour. Heat butter in a skillet over medium heat. Scoop spoonfuls of the oat mixture into the hot skillet and flatten to your desired thickness. Cook until browned and tops spring back when touched, 3 to 4 minutes per side.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Place a steamer insert into a saucepan and fill with water to just below the bottom of the steamer. Bring water to a boil. Add potatoes and season with salt and pepper. Cover and steam until tender, 10 to 15 minutes. Transfer potatoes the prepared baking dish. Beat eggs with sour cream in a large bowl and pour over potatoes. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Crumble bacon and spread over potatoes and eggs. Heat a clean nonstick skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir bell peppers and onion in hot skillet until vegetables are tender, about 5 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. Spread vegetables over egg mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are softly set, about 10 minutes. Spread sausage over eggs and top with Cheddar cheese. Continue to bake until eggs are fully set and cheese is melted, about 30 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a baking sheet. Mix oats and almonds in a large bowl. Combine honey, butter, cinnamon, and salt in a saucepan; bring to a boil for 1 minute. Pour honey mixture over oat mixture; toss to coat. Spread onto the prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven, stirring every 5 minutes, until granola is lightly browned, 15 to 20 minutes. Fold in raisins and bake for 2 more minutes. Cool and crumble.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Layer ham into a 2-quart casserole dish. Bring water to a boil in a saucepan. Slowly pour grits into the water while stirring constantly. Reduce heat to medium-low, and simmer until the grits are tender and thick, 3 to 4 minutes. Mix Cheddar cheese and butter into grits. Whisk milk, eggs, salt, and cayenne pepper together in a bowl; stir in rosemary and garlic. Pour grit mixture over ham. Cover casserole dish with aluminum foil. Bake in the preheated oven until casserole is bubbling, about 45 minutes.
Heat olive oil in a 9 or 10-inch skillet over medium heat. Add garlic and pepper flakes; cook stirring constantly until garlic is golden brown, 1 to 2 minutes. Stir in tomato sauce, basil and oregano. Bring to a simmer. Break eggs gently into sauce, spacing evenly around pan. Cover pan and simmer on low heat 10 minutes or until eggs are cooked as desired. Sprinkle eggs and sauce with Parmesan cheese and fresh oregano, if desired.
Beat banana, pumpkin puree, flour, eggs, honey, vanilla extract, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a bowl until smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Drop batter by small spoonfuls onto the griddle to form 1 1/2-inch to 3-inch pancakes and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 1 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Grease a griddle or large skillet and preheat over medium heat. Stir quinoa flour, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Stir flaxseed milk, eggs, melted butter, and honey into the flour mixture until you have a thin batter. Pour 1/4 cup batter onto your hot cooking surface per pancake and cook until bubbles form on top, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip the pancake and cook until browned on the bottom, about 2 minutes more.
Combine flour, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl. Beat egg yolks and butter together in a bowl until smooth; add coconut milk and vanilla extract and beat until smooth. Stir milk mixture into flour mixture until batter is evenly combined. Beat egg whites in a bowl until foamy, about 2 minutes; gently fold into batter. Heat coconut oil in a skillet over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls into the skillet and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend almond milk, avocado, banana, ice, and honey in a blender until smooth.
Melt butter in a large saucepan over low heat. Stir flour, mustard, salt, and pepper into butter until mixture is smooth and bubbly. Remove from heat and add milk. Return to heat and bring to a boil, stirring constantly; boil until mixture thickens, about 1 minute. Stir ham and eggs into milk mixture and cook until heated through. Spoon creamed ham and eggs onto biscuits.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place a steamer insert into a saucepan and fill with water to just below the bottom of the steamer. Bring water to a boil. Add cauliflower; cover and steam until tender, 5 to 7 minutes. Cool to room temperature. Blend cauliflower, mushrooms, and green onions in a blender under chopped, yet still chunky. Separate egg yolks and egg whites into 2 separate bowls. Beat egg whites in a bowl using an electric mixer until medium peaks form. Combine half-and-half, butter, and flour together in a saucepan over low heat; cook and stir until white sauce is thickened, about 5 minutes. Cool slightly. Stir white sauce, Parmesan cheese, cauliflower mixture, egg yolks, turmeric, salt, pepper, and curry powder together in a bowl; gently fold in egg whites using a spatula or wide knife. Pour egg mixture into a glass baking dish. Sprinkle paprika over egg mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown and set in the middle, 30 to 35 minutes.
Blend almond milk, blueberries, ice cubes, vanilla protein powder, almond butter, and chia seeds in a blender until smooth.
Combine the milk and vinegar in a bowl; set aside until the milk sours, about 5 minutes. Stir the egg, cornmeal, salt, and baking soda into the milk mixture until evenly mixed. Melt some of the butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Pour 1/2 cup of the cornmeal mixture onto the skillet and cook until bubbles appear on the surface, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip with a spatula and cook until browned on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes more. Repeat until all batter is used.
In a bowl, mix together the brown sugar, salt, crushed red pepper flakes, mint leaves, and brandy to make a paste. Rub the paste all over the salmon, wrap in plastic wrap, and refrigerate 4 hours to overnight. Preheat an outdoor grill for high heat, and lightly oil the grate. Place soaked alder chips in a small disposable aluminum pie pan or piece of aluminum foil at the back of the grill, under the grate. Allow the wood chips to begin smoking, then turn the heat to the lowest setting, position the salmon on the grate, and close the lid. Cook and smoke the salmon until it has turned a red-brown color and flakes easily, about 45 minutes.
Slice each bun in half, and place the slices on a work surface. To assemble a sandwich, place the toppings in this order: bottom of cinnamon bun, 1 slice Cheddar cheese, 1 slice of Brie cheese, apple slices, shredded ham, 1 slice of Brie cheese, 1 slice of Cheddar cheese, top of cinnamon bun. Repeat for 2nd sandwich, and gently press each sandwich together. Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Whisk eggs and milk together in a bowl. Dip both sides of each sandwich quickly into the egg mixture, and pan-fry the sandwiches until golden brown on each side, about 2 minutes per side.
In a blender or food processor, pulse the cooked beet, flour, milk, egg, vegetable oil, and vinegar until smooth. Pour the batter into a bowl and set aside for 30 minutes. Combine the cinnamon with the sugar and mix well. Heat an oiled non-stick skillet over medium heat. Pour in enough batter to cover half of the skillet. Tip and rotate the skillet until the batter covers the entire area. Cook until the batter turns from wet to moist, and the edges begin to curl away from the sides of the skillet. Turn the pancake over, and continue cooking until lightly golden on the other side. Place the pancake onto a plate, and cover with a kitchen towel to keep moist. Repeat with the remaining batter, lightly oiling the skillet as needed to keep the pancakes from sticking. Sprinkle the cinnamon sugar over the pancakes. Roll up the pancakes and serve with the orange quarters.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a baking sheet with cooking spray. Rinse and thoroughly drain the quinoa. In a large bowl, stir together the maple syrup, olive oil, and cinnamon; mix in the quinoa and flax seed until the grains are thoroughly coated. Spread the mixture out as thinly as possible on the prepared baking sheet. Toast the granola in the preheated oven until lightly golden brown, about 15 minutes, stirring every 5 minutes. Let cool completely before storing in an air-tight container.
Whisk together the eggs, milk, and 2 tablespoons of vegetable oil in a bowl; gradually add in the flour, whisking to remove all lumps. Brush a small skillet with 1 teaspoon vegetable oil, and heat over medium-high heat. Pour about 2 tablespoons of batter per crepe into the heated skillet, and tilt the pan to completely cover the surface with batter. Crepes should be about 5 inches in diameter. Cook the crepes until golden on the bottom, and set but not wet on top, 1 to 2 minutes per crepe. Don't flip the crepes. Set the cooked crepes aside. Mix the cottage cheese, egg yolks, sugar, and lemon juice in a bowl until very well combined. To fill, place a crepe in front of you on a work surface with the cooked side up, and place about 1/4 cup of cheese filling in the center of the crepe. Fold the right and left edges of the crepe over the filling, and roll the crepe over to seal the filling in, making a compact little roll filled with cheese. Set the blintzes aside. Heat 1 teaspoon of vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-low heat, and place the filled blintzes into the hot skillet. Pan-fry the blintzes until golden brown on each side, about 2 minutes per side. Eat hot or cold.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Fit pie crust into a pie dish and prick the bottom of the crust with a fork. Bake in the preheated oven for 7 minutes. Reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and continue baking until crust is golden, 8 to 10 more minutes. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir zucchini, carrots, and mushrooms until vegetables are tender, about 10 minutes; drain. Place half the zucchini mixture in the crust. Sprinkle with mozzarella cheese. Combine ricotta cheese, half-and-half, eggs, salt, oregano, basil, garlic powder, and pepper in a large bowl. Pour ricotta mixture into crust, top with remaining zucchini mixture and sprinkle with paprika. Bake quiche in the preheated oven until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean, about 45 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Mix zucchini, Swiss cheese, eggs, biscuit baking mix, canola oil, salt, and Italian seasoning in a large bowl until well blended; pour mixture into a large pie dish. Bake until browned and eggs are set, about 35 minutes.
Blend almond milk, almond butter, honey, and cinnamon in a blender until just combined. Add banana and blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place butter in a 9x13-inch casserole dish; place the casserole dish in the preheating oven until butter melts. Mix broccoli, Cheddar cheese, milk, flour, eggs, baking powder, salt, and black pepper in a large bowl. Pour mixture over melted butter in the casserole dish. Bake in the preheated oven until casserole is golden brown on top and cheese is melted, 30 to 45 minutes. Cut into squares to serve. Eat at room temperature for best flavor.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 10x15-inch baking pan. Unroll crescent roll dough and press into the prepared baking pan. Sprinkle hash browns and mozzarella cheese over the crescent roll dough. Whisk eggs, milk, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl; pour over potato-cheese layer. Top with Parmesan cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set in the middle and cheeses are melted, about 30 minutes.
Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir mushrooms, onion, and garlic until onion is browned, about 15 minutes. Season with Italian seasoning. Beat eggs with garlic and herb cheese spread in a bowl. Mixture will be slightly chunky. Season with salt and black pepper. Pour eggs in skillet over mushroom mixture; cook and stir until eggs are nearly set, about 1 minute. Fold mozzarella cheese into eggs until just melted, about 30 seconds.
In a medium sized bowl mix together the flour, salt, and baking powder. In a separate, larger bowl mix together the maple syrup, apple sauce, non-dairy milk, and vanilla. Once the wet ingredients are well incorporated, add the dry ingredients and mix well until combined. Cook according to your waffle iron's directions. We cooked ours on medium heat for about 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Coat bottom of a 12x12-inch casserole dish with butter. Spread mashed potatoes into the bottom of the prepared casserole dish to a depth of about 2 inches. Press ham slices into the mashed potatoes to form cup shapes. Break an egg into each ham cup. Dot mashed potatoes with butter. Sprinkle with parsley. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set, 25 to 30 minutes. Scoop ham cups and mashed potatoes onto serving plates and drizzle with Hollandaise sauce.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat butter in a large ovenproof skillet over medium heat; cook and stir garlic and shallot in hot butter until shallot is softened, about 5 minutes. Stir mushrooms into shallot and garlic; cook and stir until mushrooms begin to brown, 8 to 10 minutes. Stir spinach into mushroom mixture, cover, and cook until spinach is wilted, about 5 more minutes, stirring occasionally. Stir in ham, cook until ham begins to brown, about 5 minutes. Pour eggs evenly into skillet and cover. Bake in the preheated oven until the frittata is set in the middle and lightly puffed, about 25 minutes. A knife inserted into the center of the frittata should come out clean. Sprinkle with Cheddar cheese, let stand until cheese has melted, about 5 minutes. Season with salt and black pepper.
Stir milk, egg, crumbled bacon, and chives together in a 2-cup glass measuring cup. Cook in microwave oven until the egg mixture is solid in the center, 90 seconds to 2 minutes. Heat a small skillet over medium heat; cook sausage patty in hot skillet until hot in the center, 2 to 3 minutes per side. An instant-read thermometer inserted into the center should read 160 degrees F (70 degrees C). Sandwich the cooked egg, sausage, and cheese between the donut halves.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a 7x11-inch baking dish. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat and stir in ground sausage. Cook and stir until sausage is crumbly and evenly browned, 5 to 10 minutes. Remove sausage from skillet and drain all but 2 tablespoons of drippings. Cook and stir onion and bell pepper in the reserved drippings until softened, 5 to 10 minutes. Mix sausage, onion, bell pepper, sour cream, Cheddar cheese, Swiss cheese, garlic powder, hot pepper sauce, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl; mix in beaten eggs until incorporated. Pour mixture into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until edges are golden brown and center is set, 50 to 55 minutes. Allow to cool 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). In a large bowl, whip all of the eggs along with the whipping cream and salt, until fluffy. Fold in the flour, and pour the mixture into four 9-inch cake pans. Bake at 450 degrees F (230 degrees C) for 15 to 20 minutes.
Heat skillet at a high setting and toss in the chopped onion, tomato, jalapeno, and cilantro. Saute until tender. When vegetables have softened, crack eggs into the pan. Allow eggs to cook all the way on one side and then flip and cook the other side. When the eggs are finished, heat tortillas in the same skillet until warmed through. Place one tortilla on a plate and top with egg mixture and shredded cheese. Top each serving with 1 tablespoon each guacamole and sour cream.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). In a bowl, mix pork sausage, cheese sauce and biscuit mix together.  It's easiest to do with the hands. Form mixture into round, walnut size pieces and place on a cookie sheet.  Bake for 15 minutes.
Split English muffins in half and toast; set aside. In a small saucepan, heat soup and milk over low heat. Place Canadian bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Set aside and keep warm. Add eggs to skillet and cook as desired. Place English muffin halves on serving plates. Top with Canadian bacon and then eggs. Spoon warm soup over eggs.
In a small bowl, stir together eggs and chopped leek. Heat the oil in a small skillet over medium heat. Add the egg mixture and cook until set. Return skillet to heat and add garlic. Saute garlic briefly then add tomato sauce. Pour warm sauce over eggs and serve.
In a microwave-safe bowl, microwave chocolate until melted. Stir occasionally until chocolate is smooth. Set aside. In a bowl, mix the butter and sugar. Add the eggs one at a time, beating well after each one.  Stir in chocolate and vanilla.  In a separate bowl, combine flour, baking powder, and salt; add gradually to the butter and sugar mixture, alternating with the milk. Spray preheated waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray. Pour mix onto hot waffle iron. Cook until crisp.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Make 2 cheese sandwiches by placing cheese slice between 2 bread slices and pressing together. Cut each sandwich into 4 triangles and arrange in a lightly greased 9x13 inch baking dish. Mix together beaten eggs, milk, salt and pepper; pour mixture over sandwiches and sprinkle with grated cheese. (Note: Vary amounts if needed; sandwiches do not need to be totally covered in egg mixture, but egg should soak in and leave a little in the bottom of the dish.) Bake for 20 minutes or until golden brown, checking frequently.
In a medium bowl, thoroughly mix eggs, milk, instant white chocolate flavored coffee mix powder and black pepper. Pour egg mixture into a medium skillet over medium heat. Cook, stirring often, 5 to 10 minutes, until eggs are firm.
Preheat a lightly greased waffle iron. In a medium bowl, mix flour, sugar and baking soda. In a small bowl, whisk together eggs, buttermilk and butter. Stir into the flour mixture, along with blueberries and blueberry yogurt. Pour mixture into waffle iron in batches, and cook until crisp and golden brown.
In a blender, combine banana, apple, kiwi, mixed berries and orange juice. Blend until smooth. Add soy milk, yogurt, tofu, peanut butter, aloe vera juice, flaxseed oil, and barley grass powder. Blend again until well blended. Pour into glasses and serve.
Preheat a lightly greased waffle iron. In a large bowl, mix flour, cream of tartar, baking soda, cinnamon, and sugar. Mix the water, milk powder, and eggs in medium bowl, and blend into the flour mixture until smooth. Fold in the apples. Ladle batter into the preheated waffle iron. Cook waffles until golden brown.
Pour milk into a steaming pitcher and heat to 145 degrees F to 165 degrees F (65 to 70 degrees C) using the steaming wand. Measure the vanilla syrup into a large coffee mug.  Brew espresso, then add to mug.  Pour the steamed milk into the mug, using a spoon to hold back the foam. Spoon foam over the top.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Cook the chorizo in a skillet over medium heat until crumbled and evenly browned, about 5 minutes; drain and set aside. Cook the onion in the same skillet until soft; stir in the eggs and scramble with the onion. Mix in the tomatoes and continue to cook and stir until eggs are nearly set; remove from heat. Spread a layer of tortilla chips into a 9x13 baking dish. Scatter the chorizo and the scrambled egg mixture over the chips. Top with jalapeno slices and cover with the cheese. Bake in preheated oven until cheese is melted, 7 to 10 minutes.
In the container of a blender or food processor, combine the flour and salt. Pulse to blend. Add the oil and hot water, and blend until it stops sticking to the sides. Remove from the container, and cut into 4 pieces. On a lightly floured surface, roll out the dough until fairly thin. Let it rest for a minute if it is difficult to roll. Heat a large skillet over medium heat, and spray with a light coating of cooking spray. Fry one piece at a time until the surface begins to bubble. Flip over, and fry until it has brown spots on the other side. Cut each piece into quarters to serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Lightly grease two 9x5 inch loaf pans. Beat together eggs, oil, rum, and milk in a bowl.  Sift together flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, nutmeg, and salt in a separate bowl.  Mix the flour into the eggs until just moistened.  Gently fold in the pineapple, cherries, and coconut.  Pour into prepared pans. Bake in preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 40 to 45 minutes.  Let cool in pan for 10 minutes before removing to cool on a wire rack.
Heat sesame oil in a skillet over medium heat. Stir in the garlic, and cook for 20 seconds until fragrant, then stir in the onion, green onion, bell pepper, and salt. Cook for a minute or two until the vegetables soften. Sprinkle with coriander, cumin, and turmeric; cook for 30 seconds until fragrant. Spread the vegetables evenly over the bottom of the skillet. Pour in egg, and cook gently until set, then turn over, and cook for an addition 30 seconds to firm. Roll omelet onto a plate to serve.
Toast bagel to desired doneness. Spread with butter. Meanwhile, cook egg to desired doneness on a hotplate or in a microwave; salt and pepper to taste. To assemble, place the slice of American cheese onto the cut side of the bottom half of the bagel. Place the cooked egg on top of the cheese, and top with the remaining half of bagel.
Place banana and vanilla ice cream into a blender. Pour in vanilla extract, orange juice, and milk. Puree until thick and smooth.
Place a large skillet over medium-low heat. Whisk together the sugar, eggs, barbeque sauce, ranch dressing, and vegetable oil in a bowl until smooth. Stir in the flour until a moist, slightly lumpy batter forms. If the mixture is too runny, add additional flour until you get the desired consistency. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium-high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Bubbles will start to form in the pancakes. Cook until the edges of the pancakes start to look dry, and a bubble popped near the edge holds its shape. Flip the pancakes over, and continue cooking until the other side is golden brown. Repeat with remaining batter, adding more oil to the griddle if necessary. Stack the pancakes on a plate and keep warm until serving. For larger batches, keep pancakes warm in a single layer on a cooling rack positioned over a baking sheet in a 300 degrees F oven (150 degrees C).
Lightly mix the shrimp, tomatoes, red onion, cucumber, and cilantro in a bowl, and pour in the Bloody Mary mix. Squeeze the limes over the mixture, add a dash of hot pepper sauce, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Toss again, cover the bowl, and refrigerate for 3 to 4 hours, stirring occasionally.
Heat oil in a wok or skillet over medium heat. In a medium bowl, whisk together eggs, fish sauce, pepper and ground pork. When oil is hot, pour in egg mixture. Fry until fully cooked, and golden on both sides.
Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain grease from the skillet.  Crumble the bacon, and return it to the skillet. Reduce heat to medium, and add hominy and evaporated milk, and cook, stirring often. Let it bubble, but don't let the milk scorch. Cook until thickened, 10 to 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Spray a 9x13 inch baking dish with cooking spray. Place bacon in a skillet over medium-high heat, and cook until crisp and evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Mix the bacon, ham, Swiss cheese, Cheddar cheese, and onion in the baking dish. In a bowl, mix the eggs, baking mix, salt, and pepper. Pour over the ingredients in the baking dish. Bake 25 minutes in the preheated oven, until top is golden brown and a knife inserted in the center of the casserole comes out clean.
Split sausages in half lengthwise.  Brown slowly in a skillet (turning often and draining off fat as it collects) until brown and cooked through,  about 15 minutes. In another skillet, heat 2 tablespoons butter over low heat. Add apple slices and saute, turning often, until nicely browned and tender. They should be brown at the same time the sausages are ready. Toast bread and spread with softened butter.  Drain sausages and arrange on toast.  Arrange apple slices over sausages.  Pour maple syrup over all.  Serve immediately!
In a large bowl, combine amaranth flour, arrowroot, almonds, baking soda and cinnamon. In a separate bowl, combine water, lemon juice, oil and honey; mix well. Stir liquids into flour mixture; mix well. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Drop the batter by spoonfuls onto the griddle, using approximately 2 tablespoons for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Mix peaches with lemon juice; set aside. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown. Drain, crumble and set aside. Reserve 1 tablespoons bacon grease in skillet. In a large bowl, mix together crumbled bacon, water, eggs, chives, salt, sugar and black pepper. Reheat bacon grease over medium high heat. When grease is hot, pour egg batter into pan. Arrange peach slices on top of egg batter. Cover and cook over medium heat for 1 minute. Uncover and cook until set. Sprinkle with paprika. Let cool slightly before serving.
Bring a large pot of lightly salted water to a boil. Add pasta and cook for 8 to 10 minutes or until al dente; drain. Heat olive oil in a skillet or frying pan. Add onion and saute until clear. Stir in green pepper; cook until soft. Add the cooked pasta and chopped ham; toss well to combine. Pour in the eggs and season with salt and pepper. Cook until firm on one side; flip and cook until firm on the other side. You may split the frittata with a spatula to make the flipping easier.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9 inch pie pan. Pick through the crab meat and remove any bits of shell or cartilage. In a medium mixing bowl, combine crabmeat, bread crumbs, milk, eggs, parsley, lemon juice, mustard, Worcestershire sauce, salt, pepper and cayenne pepper. Transfer the quiche mixture to the prepared pan. Sprinkle paprika over the quiche. Bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes, or until the quiche is firm in the center.
Combine sour cream, sugar, egg whites, milk, vanilla, salt, and yeast in medium bowl. Mix until smooth. Pile the flour in a large flat pan and make a well in the center. Pour the sour cream mixture into the center and draw in the flour until a soft dough is formed. Gradually work in a little flour until the dough is pliant and soft but not sticky. Knead until smooth but add a minimum of flour to keep the dough from sticking. Place in a pan and leave to rise until doubled in bulk. Beat down, knead briefly, then place in a lightly sprayed 9 inch bundt cake pan. Leave to rise until doubled in bulk. Bake bread in a preheated 425 degrees F (220 degrees C) oven for 25 minutes. Reduce the oven temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and bake until golden brown on top. If necessary, cover with foil to keep from darkening. Immediately remove from cake pan and place on rack to cool.
Melt butter in large oven proof skillet on medium heat. Add eggs, 1 at a time, to skillet, leaving space between eggs; sprinkle with pepper. Cook 4 to 5 min. or until whites and yolks are set. Remove eggs from skillet; set aside. Heat oil in same skillet. Add tortilla chips; cook 5 to 8 min. or until golden brown, stirring frequently. Add onions; cook and stir 1 min. Add enchilada sauce and 1/2 cup cheese; mix lightly. Top with eggs and remaining cheese. Heat broiler. Place skillet, 6 inches from heat; broil 2 to 3 min. or until cheese is melted. Top with cilantro and avocados.
Bring water and 1/2 cup sugar to a boil in a small saucepan until sugar is dissolved, about 5 minutes; remove simple syrup from heat and allow to cool slightly while preparing remaining ingredients. Mix flour, remaining 1 cup sugar, milk, and baking powder in a bowl until blended. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and edges are dry, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on both side, about 3 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter. Stir peanut butter and about 1/2 cup simple syrup in a bowl until smooth, adding more syrup as needed. Serve peanut butter sauce on top or as a dipping sauce.
Spray a waffle iron with cooking spray and preheat according to manufacturer's instructions. Beat eggs, water, canola oil, applesauce, and vanilla extract in a large bowl thoroughly combined. Whisk whole wheat pastry flour, dry milk powder, flax seed meal, wheat germ, all-purpose flour, 1/4 cup plus 4 teaspoons baking powder, sugar, cinnamon, and salt in a separate large bowl until thoroughly combined. Mix dry ingredients into wet ingredients 1 cup at a time to make a smooth batter. Ladle 1/2 cup batter, or amount recommended by manufacturer, into preheated waffle iron; close lid and cook waffle until crisp and browned, 3 to 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Melt butter in a medium (10-inch/25 cm) frying pan over medium heat. Add mushrooms, peppers and onion; saute until tender. While vegetables are cooking, whisk together eggs and water. Pour egg mixture over vegetables in the frying pan. Cover and cook over medium heat, occasionally poking through the mixture to allow uncooked egg to flow to the bottom of the pan. When bottom is cooked and top is almost set, finish cooking the frittata on the stove top by covering it with a lid for a few minutes, or flip it over in the pan to cook the top, or cook the top under the broiler. To flip the frittata, place a dinner plate over the pan holding it firmly in place, then turn the frying pan and plate upside down. The frittata will fall into the plate, top side down. Slide the frittata back into the frying pan, top down. Cook for a few minutes until top (now the bottom) is cooked. Alternately, place the frying pan under a preheated broiler until the top is cooked and slightly puffed, about a minute or two. The frying pan must be ovenproof in order to do this. To ovenproof the handle, wrap it with a double thickness of aluminum foil. Cut into wedges and serve.
Hydrate shallots with hot water in a small bowl, 5 to 10 minutes. Drain. Sift flour, baking powder, salt, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a large bowl. Whisk eggs, squash, shallots, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl; stir into flour mixture until just mixed. Fold currants into batter. Heat vegetable oil in a skillet over medium heat. Scoop about 1/4 cup batter and drop into hot oil. Cook pancakes until crisp and lightly browned, 6 to 8 minutes per side. Repeat with remaining batter. Mix sour cream, vanilla extract, and maple syrup together in a bowl. Serve atop the squash pancakes.
Heat oil over medium heat in large skillet. Add potatoes; cook 10 minutes, or until potatoes are browned and tender, stirring frequently. Stir in bacon, red pepper, chives, garlic and basil. Cook 3 minutes, until red pepper is crisp-tender, stirring frequently. Add 1 cup cheese; stir until melted. Season to taste with salt and pepper. Top with remaining cheese.
Place the yogurt, milk, mangoes, white sugar, and cardamom into the jar of a blender and blend until smooth, about 2 minutes. Chill in the refrigerator for 1 hour or until cold, and serve sprinkled with a little ground cardamom.
Place frozen berries and maple syrup in a microwavable bowl, and cook on High for 2 minutes. Drain. In a large bowl, stir together the whole wheat flour, quinoa flour, baking powder, and cinnamon. Stir in Splenda(R) if desired. Pour in milk and egg.  Stir just until smooth. Heat a large skillet or griddle over medium heat. Coat with cooking spray. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter. Top pancakes with berries and vanilla yogurt to serve.
Stir the garbanzo bean flour, oats, cornmeal, cinnamon, and baking powder together in a mixing bowl until evenly blended. Stir in the water until only small lumps remain. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat until a drop of water skitters across the surface. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, and cook until  the edges are dry. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side, about 3 minutes per side. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat the butter in a skillet over medium heat until the foam subsides, and cook and stir the onion and tomato until the onion is translucent and the liquid from the tomato has evaporated, about 8 minutes. Transfer the tomato and onion to a bowl. Pour the beaten eggs into the cooked vegetables, and stir in tarragon, basil, salt, black pepper, and Cheddar cheese until thoroughly combined. Pour the egg mixture into the red bell pepper, and set into a small baking dish, standing upright. Cover the dish and pepper with foil. Bake in the preheated oven until the pepper is tender and the eggs are set, about 55 minutes.
Spray a skillet with cooking spray, and place over medium heat. Cook and stir the chicken until lightly browned and no longer pink, about 5 minutes. With a spatula, spread the chicken pieces out into the bottom of the skillet. Spray again with cooking spray if needed. In a bowl, beat the egg whites with soy sauce, and stir in the bean sprouts, water chestnuts, and green onion. Pour the egg mixture into the skillet over the chicken, and let cook until the bottom is lightly golden and the top has nearly set, about 3 minutes. Flip the egg pancake over, and cook the other side until lightly golden and set, another minute or two.
Combine potatoes, ham, eggs, mozzarella cheese, onion powder, garlic powder, salt, and black pepper in a bowl. Heat a large skillet over medium-low heat. Pour enough olive oil to cover bottom of pan. Scoop up about 1/2 cup of potato mixture per pancake and form into a patty. Repeat, making 8 patties in all. Place 4 pancakes at time in hot olive oil. Cook until browned, about 4 minutes on each side. Transfer to paper towel-lined plate. Sprinkle with green onion and Parmesan cheese.
Cook sausage in a large skillet over medium heat until no longer pink, following cooking instructions indicated on the packaging. Add diced onions and continue to cook until onion softens and turns transparent. Drain fat. Stir in the Alfredo sauce, sage and black pepper.  Bring to a simmer, stirring occasionally; reduce heat and simmer for 10 minutes. Serve over fresh biscuits and top with green onion.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease 3 mini-loaf pans. Beat zucchini, agave nectar, egg, coconut oil, applesauce, lemon juice, and lemon zest together with an electric mixer in a bowl until smooth. Whisk flour, cinnamon, salt, baking soda, and baking powder together in a bowl; mix into zucchini mixture until batter is just combined. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean, 30 to 40 minutes. Cool bread in pans for 10 minutes before turning onto a wire rack to cool completely.
Blend grapefruit, water, spinach, ice cubes, ginger, and flax seeds in a blender or NutriBullet(R) until smooth.
Preheat and grease a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Sift flour, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk buttermilk, yogurt, butter, eggs, and sugar together in a separate bowl; stir into flour mixture until batter is smooth. Fold strawberries into batter. Pour about 1/3 cup batter into preheated waffle iron; cook until lightly browned, 5 to 7 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Spread chocolate-hazelnut spread on 1 side of each slice of bread. Arrange banana slices over chocolate-hazelnut spread on 2 of the slices. Place remaining slices atop bananas to form 2 sandwiches. Whisk chocolate milk, eggs, vanilla extract, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Dip sandwiches in milk mixture and turn as necessary to coat completely. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium-low heat. Cook sandwiches in hot butter until both sides are golden brown and banana and chocolate spread have softened, 4 to 6 minutes per side.
Melt butter in a skillet over medium-low heat; saute onion, ham, and green bell pepper until onion and bell pepper are tender, 5 to 10 minutes. Pour eggs into ham-vegetable mixture; cook and stir until eggs are scrambled and cooked through, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle Monterey Jack cheese over egg mixture; cook and stir until cheese is melted, 2 to 3 minutes. Serve egg mixture in tortillas; top with salsa.
Preheat oven to 390 degrees F (199 degrees C). Mix condensed chicken soup, mayonnaise, cream, onion, lemon juice, curry powder, salt, and pepper together in a large bowl. Add chopped chicken; stir to combine. Divide chicken mixture equally in the center of each crepe. Fold sides and roll crepes. Place rolled crepes, seam-side down, in a baking dish. Sprinkle crepes with Cheddar cheese and drizzle with 1/3 cup cream. Bake in preheated oven until crepes are heated through and Cheddar cheese is golden and bubbling, 25 to 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease and flour two 5x9-inch bread pans. Place strawberries in a bowl and sprinkle with 1 tablespoon sugar. Mix whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour, oats, 2/3 cup white sugar, baking powder, and cinnamon together in the bowl of a stand mixer. Stir bananas, eggs, and oil into strawberry mixture; pour into flour mixture. Beat mixture using the stand mixer until batter is just combined. Divide batter between the 2 prepared bread pans. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown and a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, 25 to 35 minutes.
Combine milk, oats, yogurt, raspberry preserves, chia seeds, and almond extract together in a jar or container with a tight-fitting lid. Cover and vigorously shake mixture until well mixed. Remove lid and stir in raspberries. Cover and refrigerate at least 6 hours.
Whisk eggs in a bowl until pale yellow. Whisk buttermilk, vanilla, butter, and nutmeg into eggs until butter is reduced to small pieces. Stir flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt into egg mixture until just moistened. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-low heat. Drop batter by 1/2 cup portions onto the griddle, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 4 minutes. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter.
Combine drink mix, almond butter, oats, banana, and coconut in a medium bowl. Line an 8-inch baking pan with foil. Spray foil with cooking spray. Press mixture evenly into the pan and place freeze until firm, 2 to 3 hours. Cut into bars. Serve frozen, or let soften in the refrigerator.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Mix walnuts, pecans, coconut, and almonds together in a bowl. Stir cinnamon, erythritol, and sucralose into melted butter; pour over nut mixture and stir to coat. Spread granola in a single layer on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until crunchy, 8 to 10 minutes. Remove from oven; stir and allow to cool.
Combine corned beef hash, onion, and bell pepper in an ovenproof skillet. Cook, stirring occasionally, over medium-high heat until vegetables begin to soften and hash begins to brown, 10 to 15 minutes. Make 4 indentations in the hash for the eggs. Remove from heat. Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Carefully crack an egg into each indentation. Top with chopped tomatoes. Place skillet under broiler; broil until eggs are cooked to preferred doneness, 4 to 10 minutes. Check often to avoid burning eggs. Remove skillet from oven. Top with shredded cheese; sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Add Quaker(R) Oats to your container of choice, pour in milk, add in raisins and pecans. Sweeten by topping with brown sugar and gingerbread spice before refrigerating overnight. Rise, shine, and enjoy!
Combine water, quinoa, and olive oil in a saucepan; bring to a boil. Stir rosemary into the quinoa mixture. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until quinoa is tender and water is absorbed, 15 to 20 minutes. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease 6 muffin cups. Mix quinoa mixture, zucchini, mozzarella cheese, black beans, 1/4 cup Parmesan cheese, eggs, egg whites, and white pepper together in a large bowl. Spoon mixture into each muffin cup and top with remaining Parmesan cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until set in the middle and edges are golden brown, 25 to 30 minutes. Cool for 5 minutes in the muffin cups.
Heat a skillet over high heat; add SPAM(R) with Bacon, reduce heat to medium and cook and stir until SPAM(R) with Bacon starts to brown, 2 to 5 minutes. While SPAM(R) with Bacon is browning, crack eggs into a bowl, add water and whisk thoroughly with a fork. Reduce heat to low; pour eggs into skillet. Cook and stir lightly until eggs are set. Remove SPAM(R) with Bacon mixture from skillet. Turn heat up to medium and place first tortilla into skillet. Top with SPAM(R) with Bacon mixture, salsa, and Colby-Jack cheese. Top with remaining tortilla. Cook until bottom tortilla starts to brown; flip carefully. Continue cooking on the other side until the cheese melts and tortilla starts to brown, about 5 minutes per side.
Beat egg whites, almond milk, and vanilla extract together in a bowl until smooth; add coconut flour, baking powder, and sea salt and continue to beat until no clumps remain. Let the mixture sit for 8 minutes. Heat a small non-stick skillet over medium heat. Pour about 1/3 of the batter into the pan. Tilt the pan so the batter covers the bottom of the skillet to all sides. Cook until the edges begin to slightly lift and the bottom is slightly browned, about 2 minutes; flip and cook until the other side is browned, 1 to 2 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 13x9-inch baking dish. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Beat eggs with sour cream in a large bowl until smooth; pour into prepared baking dish. Bake eggs in preheated oven until set, about 15 minutes. Spread layers of sausage, green chiles, salsa, Cheddar cheese, Monterey Jack cheese, and jalapeno slices, respectively, over the baked eggs. Bake casserole until the cheese melts completely and the layers are hot in the middle, 20 to 25 minutes. Arrange avocado slices over the top of the casserole.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8-inch square baking dish or line with parchment paper. Combine coconut flour, baking soda, baking powder, cinnamon, and salt in a bowl. Mash bananas in a separate bowl; whisk in eggs. Stir coconut sugar and vanilla extract into banana mixture; stir into coconut flour mixture using a wooden spoon, folding until batter is combined. Spoon batter into the baking dish; top with sunflower seeds and extra coconut sugar. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the middle comes out clean, about 45 minutes. Cool bread in the refrigerator, about 20 minutes. Store in refrigerator.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8x8-inch baking dish. Bring milk, brown sugar, cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves to a boil in a saucepan; remove from heat. Combine oats, apples, dried cranberries, and walnuts in a bowl; transfer to the prepared baking dish. Pour milk mixture over oat mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned, 30 to 35 minutes.
Mix flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a large bowl. Add kefir and eggs; stir until batter is moist but still lumpy. Fold in chocolate chips. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until golden on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Mix yogurt, blueberries, goji berries, flax seed, walnuts, almonds, cocoa powder, cinnamon, and honey together in a bowl.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place sweet potato in a baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until flesh is easily punctured with a fork, 45 minutes to 1 hour. Allow sweet potato to cool until easily handled; peel. Mash sweet potato and bananas together in a bowl using a fork or electric mixer until smooth; add eggs and vanilla extract and mix well. Whisk coconut flour, almond flour, baking powder, and cinnamon together in a separate bowl; stir into sweet potato mixture until batter is well combined and thick. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Drop about 1/4 cup batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 4 to 5 minutes. Flip and flatten pancake with spatula and cook until browned on the other side, 3 to 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Layer banana, spinach, mango, and jalapeno pepper in a blender; add water and blend until smooth, adding more water for a thinner smoothie.
Blend milk, strawberries, sugar, oats, and egg together in a blender until smooth and creamy.
Line a 9x13-inch baking pan with parchment paper. Blend quinoa, dates, honey, applesauce, coconut, sunflower seeds, coconut oil, and vanilla together in a food processor until smooth. Add enough of the oats to fill the processor bowl and and blend until combined. Stir the quinoa mixture with the remaining oats, flax seed, protein powder, sesame seeds, chia seeds, and salt in a large bowl until mixture is able to hold it's shape without sticking to you hands. Press mixture firmly into prepared baking pan and refrigerate until chilled, at least 1 hour.
Bring a large pot of salted water to boil; add potatoes and boil until just tender, 7 to 10 minutes. Drain. Heat a large nonstick skillet over medium to medium-high heat and cook sausage links. When cooked through, remove to a plate. Add bacon to the same skillet and cook to nearly your desired doneness. During the last few minutes, add cubed ham to crisp and heat through, 5 to 8 minutes. Remove bacon and ham with a slotted spoon and drain on paper towels. Reserve grease. Heat 1 tablespoon oil over medium-high heat in a large pot. Add onion and bell pepper; season lightly with salt and pepper. Cook and stir occasionally until tender, 10 to 15 minutes. Place cooked potatoes in the skillet with the bacon grease over medium heat. Brown on all sides, turning gently as needed. Season potatoes with seasoned salt and pepper, to taste. Melt butter in a separate skillet over medium heat. Fry eggs to your desired doneness. Distribute browned potatoes among 4 plates. Top with bell pepper-onion mixture, and the meats. Sprinkle with Cheddar cheese and top each with a fried egg.
Place chia seeds in a bowl. Layer banana and dates in a blender; add almond milk, cinnamon, and salt. Blend mixture until smooth and pour over chia seeds, stirring well. Let mixture sit until thickened, at least 15 minutes. Stir chia 'porridge' and top with blueberries.
Beat eggs in a bowl until smooth. Mix almond flour, tapioca flour, almond milk, vanilla extract, baking soda, baking powder, and salt into eggs until batter is just combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat or heat an electric frying pan. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease an 8x8-inch baking pan. Mix rolled oats, brown sugar, baking powder, salt, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a mixing bowl until ingredients are evenly distributed. Mix mashed sweet potatoes, milk, eggs, and vegetable oil together in a separate bowl until well blended. Pour sweet potato mixture into oats mixture and mix well. Spread mixture evenly into prepared baking dish. Bake in preheated oven until oatmeal has set and the top is golden brown, about 30 minutes.
In a medium bowl, mix all ingredients. In a non-stick skillet over medium-low heat, scoop 1/4 cup spoonfuls of batter into pan. Cook 3 to 4 minutes or until golden brown, then flip and cook an additional 1 to 2 minutes on the other side. Serve with fresh fruit & maple syrup.
Whisk eggs, half-and-half, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Whisk in goat cheese and chives. Melt butter in a skillet over medium-high heat. Pour in egg mixture; cook, stirring occasionally, until set, about 5 minutes. Transfer to serving plates; draw a line down each plate with sriracha sauce.
In a blender combine blueberries, kefir, peanut butter, stevia, flax, vanilla, and cinnamon. Blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until starting to brown, about 5 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Line 6 cups of a nonstick muffin tin with bacon slices. Chop leftover bacon slices and sprinkle over the bottom of each cup. Whisk eggs, milk, butter, parsley, salt, and pepper together in a large bowl. Stir in ham and mozzarella cheese. Pour egg mixture into the bacon-lined cups; top with Gouda cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until Gouda cheese is melted and eggs are set, about 15 minutes.
Bring water to a boil in a saucepan; add quinoa and oats. Simmer, stirring frequently, until water is absorbed and quinoa is tender, 15 to 20 minutes. Stir almond meal and flaxseed meal into quinoa mixture; pour into a glass container and top with cinnamon. Let cool, about 15 minutes. Transfer to the refrigerator.
Add Quaker(R) Oats to your container of choice and pour in milk and low-fat yogurt. Mix in almond extract. Add a layer of mango. Top off with a drizzle of honey and chia seeds. Place in fridge and enjoy in the morning or a few hours later!
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 9x13-inch baking pan with non-stick cooking spray. Cut biscuits into quarters; arrange them to cover bottom of prepared baking pan. Bake in preheated oven until biscuits have started to cook but are not done, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle with 1/3 cup shredded Cheddar cheese. Whisk eggs, milk, salt, and black pepper together in a mixing bowl. Place a non-stick skillet over medium to medium-high heat. Spoon in the corned beef hash. Cook and stir until hot and beginning to crisp up, 5 to 8 minutes. Remove from heat. Pour in egg mixture and continue to stir until eggs have started to cook but are not set, about 30 seconds. Spread egg and hash mixture evenly over biscuits. Sprinkle with remaining Cheddar cheese. Spread prepared country gravy over the top and bake until cooked through, about 45 minutes.
Place chocolate drink mix, milk, coffee, ice cubes, and oats in a blender pitcher. Run blender on smoothie cycle or liquefy for 20 to 30 seconds.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Mix sausage, cream cheese, spinach, garlic, and red pepper flakes in a bowl. Unroll and separate crescent roll dough into individual portions. Spread equal amounts of the sausage mixture into the middle of each dough portion. Roll and wrap dough around the filling to look like a baseball rather than a crescent roll; arrange onto a baking sheet. Bake in preheated oven until golden brown, about 25 minutes. Cool 10 minutes before serving.
Blend mango, bananas, coconut milk, water, ice, sugar, coconut extract, and lime zest in a blender until smooth.
Heat oven to 350 degrees F. Cook and stir bacon in large skillet on medium heat 10 min. or until crisp. Remove bacon from skillet with slotted spoon; drain on paper towels. Discard all but 2 Tbsp. drippings from skillet. Add potatoes, mushrooms, peppers and onions to reserved drippings in skillet; cook 10 min. or until peppers and onions are crisp-tender, stirring occasionally. Stir in VELVEETA. Spoon into 13x9-inch baking dish sprayed with cooking spray. Whisk eggs and sour cream in medium bowl until blended; stir in bacon. Pour over vegetable mixture. Bake 40 min. or until center is set and casserole is heated through.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Mix almond meal, butter, garlic, 1/2 teaspoon sea salt, and 1/8 teaspoon white pepper together, forming a ball. Gently press dough into a 9-inch pie pan. Bake crust in the preheated oven for 10 minutes. The crust will puff up slightly; gently press it back down with a spoon or fork. Continue baking until just lightly browned, 8 to 10 minutes. Whisk half-and-half, eggs, 1/2 teaspoon sea salt, 1/4 teaspoon white pepper, and nutmeg in a large bowl. Sprinkle bacon into the bottom of the pie crust; top with Swiss cheese. Pour egg mixture over Swiss cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean, about 35 minutes. Let cool for 5 to 10 minutes to finish setting in the middle.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch cast iron skillet. Pour hot water over raisins and currants in a bowl and let soak. Whisk flour, sugar, salt, and baking soda in a separate bowl until well combined; whisk in buttermilk. Drain raisins and currants and pat dry with paper towels; fold into dough. Turn dough out onto a floured work surface and knead gently until it holds its shape; if dough is too sticky, knead in more flour. Form into a round and place into prepared cast iron skillet. Use a sharp knife to cut a cross into the top of the loaf. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown and a slender knife inserted into the loaf comes out clean, about 1 hour.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Whisk bread flour, oat flour, sugar, baking powder, cinnamon, and salt together in a bowl. Mix almond milk, applesauce, and coconut oil together in a separate bowl; stir into flour mixture until batter is just combined. Fold chocolate chips into batter; let stand for 5 minutes. Scoop 1/4 to 1/2 cup batter into preheated waffle iron; cook according to manufacturer's instructions, about 4 minutes per waffle.
Stir potatoes, onion, eggs, flour, garlic powder, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl. Heat a lightly oiled large skillet over medium heat. Drop potato mixture by large spoonfuls onto the skillet and cook until edges are dry and golden, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 3 to 4 minutes. Repeat with remaining potato mixture.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Butter a 9x13-inch baking dish. Bring Alfredo sauce to a simmer in a saucepan over medium-low heat, about 5 minutes; add garlic, salt, and pepper. Reduce heat to low and keep sauce warm. Mix Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese and Pecorino cheese together in a bowl. Arrange 1/4 the potato slices in the bottom of the prepared baking dish, overlapping them slightly. Sprinkle 1/4 cup cheese mixture, 1 tablespoon parsley, and 1/3 the ham over potato layer. Repeat layering 2 more times, ending with a final layer of potatoes and 1/4 cup cheese mixture. Pour Alfredo sauce mixture over and around the potatoes. Bake in the preheated oven until potatoes are tender, sauce is bubbling, and top is golden brown, 25 to 30 minutes. Let potatoes cool for 15 minutes. Sprinkle remaining 1 tablespoon parsley over potatoes before serving.
Combine water, apple, and cranberries together in a bowl; bring to a boil. Cook mixture until cranberries burst and apple is tender, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to medium and stir oats, brown sugar, cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt into apple mixture. Cook, stirring continuously, until water is absorbed and oatmeal thickens, 2 to 3 minutes. Top oatmeal with walnuts.
Blend persimmons, milk, banana, ice, coconut, honey, ginger, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a blender until smooth.
Heat a lightly oiled griddle to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Stir pancake mix, pumpkin puree, water, white chocolate chips, pecans, and cinnamon together in a large bowl until just incorporated, adding more water as needed. Drop batter by 1/2 cup scoops onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 2 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 4 minutes; repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 475 degrees F (245 degrees C). Cook and stir sliced Italian sausage in a skillet over medium heat until some of the fat has rendered out and sausage is no longer pink inside, about 5 minutes. Transfer sausage slices to a paper towel-lined plate to drain. Roll pizza dough out to about 12 inches in diameter and about 3/8-inch thick; sprinkle with cornmeal. Flip dough so the cornmeal side is down and transfer to a perforated 14-inch pizza pan. Spread pizza sauce in a thin layer on top of the dough. Sprinkle with red pepper flakes and about 3/4 the Fontina cheese. Spread sausage slices onto the pizza, leaving 4 spaces about 3 inches across on the pizza for eggs. Sprinkle remaining Fontina cheese onto sausage slices. Bake in the preheated oven until dough is hot, edges are starting to brown, and cheese has started to melt, 10 to 12 minutes. Crack each egg into a separate ramekin or small bowl. Remove pizza from oven and use a spatula to press the spaces between sausage slices flat. Gently pour an egg onto each space. Grind a little black pepper onto each egg yolk. Lightly sprinkle Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese over entire pizza. Return to oven and bake until eggs are set but yolks are still liquid, about 5 minutes, checking frequently to avoid overcooking eggs. Toss arugula leaves with olive oil in a bowl until coated. Remove pizza from oven, poke egg yolks with a fork, spread them around a little, and sprinkle arugula over the top of the pizza. Cut into 4 quarters, each with an egg, to serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees  F. Grease twelve 2 1/2-inch muffin cups. Whisk evaporated milk, eggs, flour, salt and black pepper in medium bowl until blended. Stir in cheese, broccoli, bell pepper and tomatoes. Spoon 1/4 to 1/3 cup of mixture into each prepared muffin cup, filling almost to rim*. Stir mixture frequently to evenly distribute ingredients. Bake for 23 to 28 minutes or until knife inserted near centers comes out clean and tops are lightly browned. Cool in pans for 15 minutes. Run knife or small, flat spatula around inside edges of muffin cups. Carefully remove quiches.
Mix whole milk and brown sugar in a large bowl. Beat eggs, vanilla extract, almond extract, cinnamon, nutmeg, and allspice together in a separate bowl until the eggs are well beaten; add to the milk mixture and stir to dissolve the brown sugar. Heat a non-stick skillet or griddle over medium-low heat. Set one slice of Texas toast into the milk mixture; let soak until moistened, about 10 seconds per side. Cook the dipped toast in the preheated skillet until bottom is golden brown, 3 to 5 minutes; flip toast and continue to cook until the other side is browned, 3 to 5 minutes more. Repeat dipping and cooking with remaining bread slices.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Coat a skillet with cooking spray and place over medium heat; cook and stir onion and zucchini until tender, 5 to 10 minutes. Place cauliflower in a microwave-safe bowl and add water; cook in microwave until cauliflower is tender, about 3 minutes. Drain water. Whisk egg whites, garlic powder, cayenne pepper, salt, and pepper together in a bowl; add zucchini-onion mixture, cauliflower, and pepperjack cheese. Pour egg mixture into a 10-inch round pan. Bake in the preheated oven until quiche is set in the middle, about 25 minutes.
Whisk soy milk, flour, nutritional yeast, sugar, vanilla extract, and cinnamon together in a bowl; transfer to a rimmed plate or shallow dish. Dip both sides of each bread slice in soy milk mixture. Heat a lightly oiled skillet over medium-low heat. Cook each slice of bread until golden brown, 3 to 4 minutes per side.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Combine sausage, baking mix, Cheddar cheese, egg, and evaporated milk in the bowl of a stand mixer; mix on low speed until thoroughly combined. Shape sausage mixture into 1-inch balls and arrange onto baking sheets. Bake in preheated oven until no longer pink in the center, 8 to 10 minutes. An instant-read thermometer inserted into the center should read at least 160 degrees F (70 degrees C).
Blend berries, yogurt, oats, water, protein powder, and honey in a blender until smooth.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Crumble bacon pieces. Bring a large pot of lightly salted water to a boil. Add asparagus and cook until tender yet firm to the bite, 2 to 3 minutes. Drain. Heat vegetable oil in a skillet over medium-high heat; saute onion, tomato, and mushrooms until tender, about 5 minutes. Whisk eggs and cream together in a bowl; add bacon, sauteed vegetables, asparagus, nutmeg, salt, and pepper. Pour egg mixture into an oven-proof nonstick skillet and cover skillet. Cook over medium-low until cooked through, 10 to 12 minutes. Sprinkle mozzarella cheese over omelette. Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Broil omelette in the preheated oven until a golden crust starts to form on the top, about 2 minutes.
Melt butter in a skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir mushrooms, onion, and pepper in melted butter until soft, about 5 minutes; add tomatoes and capers and bring to a simmer. Pour beaten eggs over vegetable mixture; cook and stir until eggs are scrambled and no longer runny, about 5 minutes. Spoon egg mixture over toast.
Rehydrate and prepare 6 servings of Idahoan Hash Browns according to package, ensuring that they are golden brown. Prepare scrambled eggs and add diced poblano chilies. Warm tortillas and top with 1/2 cup hash browns and 1/2 cup scrambled egg mixture. Sprinkle with scallions and 3 dollops of soft goat cheese on top of eggs. Fold the sides of the tortilla in towards the center and roll up from the bottom, making sure to tuck in the sides as you roll. Repeat with remaining ingredients. Serve with a side of salsa verde.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned and crispy, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on paper towels. Lightly beat eggs and sour cream together in a bowl. Heat oil in a skillet over medium-low heat; cook and stir egg mixture and hot sauce in the hot oil until light and fluffy, 5 to 7 minutes. Fold tomatoes, avocado, and spinach into egg mixture just until warmed, 1 to 2 minutes. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese over egg mixture and cook until cheese is lightly melted, 1 to 2 minutes; season with salt and pepper.
Heat butter in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir tortilla strips and green chile peppers until strips are softened, 2 to 3 minutes. Add eggs and Cheddar cheese; cook and stir until eggs are cooked through, 3 to 4 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Generously grease 36 miniature muffin cups with coconut oil. Whisk eggs, ghee, pumpkin puree, maple syrup, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Stir coconut flour, baking soda, and sea salt into egg mixture just until batter is combined. Fold frozen blueberries into batter. Spoon batter into the prepared muffin cups. Press 1 fresh blueberry on top of each muffin. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned, about 25 minutes.
Spray the inside of a 9x13-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Arrange bread slices in a single layer in the prepared baking dish. Whisk coconut milk, egg substitute, sugar, and vanilla extract together in a bowl until evenly combined; pour over bread. Turn bread over to coat. Cover baking dish with plastic wrap and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove plastic wrap from baking dish. Turn bread slices over and sprinkle coconut over bread; let stand for 15 minutes. Bake in the preheated oven until egg is set and coconut is golden, about 30 minutes.
Blend almond milk, blackberries, blueberries, coconut butter, honey, and chia seeds in a NutriBullet(R) or blender until smooth and creamy.
Pour water into the pitcher of a high-powered blender; add the orange, spinach, beet, carrots, cauliflower, broccoli, blueberries, celery, lime, honey, and chia seeds. Blend on high speed until smooth, about 1 minute.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 12-inch cast iron skillet. Sift flour, sugar, and baking powder together in a large bowl. Beat eggs with milk in a separate bowl. Stir egg mixture into flour mixture until moistened; batter will be very thick. Fold in raisins until thoroughly combined. Spread batter into prepared cast iron skillet. Bake in the preheated oven until bread has risen and is golden brown on top, about 1 hour.
Preheat the oven's broiler and set the oven rack in the upper third of the oven. Beat the eggs and egg whites in a mixing bowl until smooth. Whisk in the parsley, 1/4 teaspoon salt, and 1/4 teaspoon pepper until evenly blended; set aside. Heat the olive oil in a 10-inch cast-iron skillet over medium heat. Stir in the onion, and season with 1/4 teaspoon salt, and 1/4 teaspoon pepper. Cook and stir until the onion softens and turns translucent, about 5 minutes. Stir in the tomatoes, and cook an additional minute. Add the cooked Swiss chard; cook and stir until the Swiss chard is hot. Pour in the egg mixture, cover, and cook until the edges of the egg have set, about 5 minutes. Uncover the frittata, and sprinkle with Parmesan cheese. Broil in the preheated oven until the cheese is golden brown and the center of the frittata has set, about 2 minutes. Remove from the oven, and let stand 3 minutes before serving.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Prepare a 9x12-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Place the bread cubes in the prepared dish. Sprinkle the pecans over the bread. Beat the eggs, 1 1/2 cup milk, almond extract, 1 tablespoon cardamom, cinnamon, and brown sugar together in a bowl until thoroughly combined; pour the mixture evenly over the bread cubes and pecans. Cover the dish with aluminum foil and allow the casserole to sit 15 minutes to allow the flavors to combine. Bake in the preheated oven for 20 minutes; remove the aluminum foil and continue baking until the top is golden brown, another 20 to 25 minutes. Remove from oven and allow to cool slightly, about 10 minutes. Mix the confectioners' sugar, 1/2 teaspoon cardamom, and 3 tablespoons milk in a bowl with a fork until smooth; pour over the slightly cooled casserole to serve.
Whisk together the mayonnaise and half-and-half in a large bowl until smooth, then whisk in the eggs, dill weed, and garlic powder. Set aside. Heat the bacon drippings in a large skillet over medium heat. Stir in the red bell pepper; cook and stir until the bell pepper begins to soften, about 2 minutes. Stir in the ham and onion. Continue cooking and stirring until the onion is translucent and softened, about 5 minutes more. Pour in the egg mixture. Cook and stir until the eggs are set, about 5 minutes.
Whisk together millet flour, soy milk, and vegetable oil in a bowl to make a batter the consistency of heavy cream. Add a teaspoon of water to thin the batter, if necessary. Mash the black bean sauce in a small bowl with 1 teaspoon of water to make it easy to spread. In a separate small bowl, mix the hot chili sauce with 1 teaspoon of water.  Set the sauces aside. Spray a large skillet generously with cooking spray, and heat over medium-low heat. Pour the batter into the skillet, and spread evenly to make a thin crepe. Cook the crepe for 1 to 2 minutes, until firm. Pour the egg evenly over the crepe. Cook an additional 1 to 2 minutes, until the egg is set. Sprinkle the crepe with green onion slices and cilantro leaves, pressing them firmly into the cooked egg. Flip the crepe and spread with bean sauce and chili sauce. Place the crackers in the center of the crepe, leaving about 1/4 inch of space between the two crackers. Flip the top third of the crepe down over the crackers, flip the bottom third up, and then fold the crepe in half so the crackers are stacked on top of each other in a tidy package. Serve hot.
Cut the bread into 12 slices. In a bowl, whisk together the eggs, Irish whiskey, Irish cream liqueur, and vanilla extract until well blended. Heat some of the butter in a skillet over medium heat until the butter is hot and the foam has disappeared. Press each bread slice into the egg mixture, then fry in the hot skillet until nicely browned on both sides, about 2 minutes per side. Add more butter to skillet as needed. Brush each slice with butter, and sprinkle with confectioners' sugar.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spread hazelnuts evenly on a baking sheet. Bake until lightly toasted, about 5 to 7 minutes. Remove the pan from the oven, transfer the nuts to a bowl, and let them cool. Place the eggnog, sugar, salt, butter, egg, egg yolk, bread flour, yeast, anise seed, and cinnamon into the bread machine. Program the machine for a basic cycle with the crust as "medium." Press start. Do not use the delay timer. Place the cooled toasted hazelnuts into the machine between Knead Cycle 1 and Knead Cycle 2. When the baking cycle ends, immediately remove the bread from the pan and allow it to cool on a rack. Prepare the glaze by combining the confectioners' sugar and eggnog in a bowl; mix well. It should be a drizzling consistency. Drizzle the glaze on the cooled bread before slicing.
Preheat and grease a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Beat egg whites in a glass or metal bowl until foamy and stiff peaks form. Lift your beater or whisk straight up: the egg whites will form sharp peaks. Mix spelt flour, baking powder, salt, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Whisk egg yolks, soy milk, apple, and vegetable oil together in a separate bowl; pour into flour mixture. Stir to combine. Fold egg whites into batter, leaving some clumps. Pour about 1 cup batter into waffle iron; cook until golden brown and crispy, 5 to 10 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Prepare rice according to package directions. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). While rice cooks, saute bacon pieces in a 10-inch oven proof skillet over medium heat until starting to crisp, about 5 minutes. Drain off all but 1 tablespoon bacon fat, then add the scallion whites and edamame (or if desired, use 1 cup frozen green peas) to the bacon in the pan and saute one minute. Add the cooked rice, and saute one minute. Whisk together the eggs, 1/2 cup sour cream, and the salt, and add to the pan, swirling gently to distribute the egg mixture evenly throughout the other ingredients. Cook undisturbed for 2-3 minutes, until edges look set then place the pan in the preheated oven until set in the center, about 10 minutes further. Mix together the scallion greens with the remaining 1/2 cup sour cream, and serve frittata in wedges topped with a dollop of the scallion cream.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 2-quart baking dish with cooking spray. Spread potatoes into the prepared baking dish; sprinkle with 1/2 teaspoon black pepper. Mix eggs, Italian cheese blend, onion, pico de gallo, 1/2 teaspoon black pepper, Greek seasoning, and cayenne pepper together in a bowl; pour over potatoes. Bake casserole in the preheated oven until lightly browned and eggs are set, about 40 minutes.
Cook potatoes and bacon in large skillet on medium heat 8 to 10 min. or until bacon is crisp and potatoes are tender, stirring occasionally; drain. Combine potato mixture, bread, broccoli and 1 cup shredded cheese; spoon into 13x9-inch baking dish sprayed with cooking spray. Whisk cream cheese spread, eggs and pepper in medium bowl until blended. Gradually add milk, beating well after each addition; pour over bread mixture. (Bread cubes should be evenly moistened.) Cover with foil. Refrigerate 2 hours. Heat oven to 375 degrees F. Bake strata, covered, 30 min. or until knife inserted in center comes out clean. Sprinkle with remaining shredded cheese; bake, uncovered, 10 min. or until cheese is melted.
Mix buttermilk, oats, butter, eggs, brown sugar, baking powder, baking soda, syrup, cinnamon, salt, and nutmeg together in a large bowl; fold in raisins. Oil a griddle over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle; cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 5 minutes. Flip pancakes and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 more minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Stir cornmeal into boiling water. Stir in butter, molasses, and egg. Dissolve yeast in warm water (110 degrees F). When cornmeal mixture is lukewarm, stir in dissolved yeast. Beat in flour until a stiff dough is formed. Knead dough on a heavily floured board until smooth and elastic. Let rise in a warm place until doubled in bulk. Punch down and roll dough into a 10" square. Sprinkle blueberries over dough, pressing them into the dough. Roll up like a jelly roll. Tuck ends of roll under to seal ends and place seam-side down into a well-greased 9x5x3 inch loaf pan. Let rise in a warm place until double in bulk. Bake in a preheated oven at 375 degrees F (190 degrees C) for 45-50 minutes. Turn out and cool on a rack. Cool thoroughly before cutting.
Scald milk. Soften yeast in warm water; let stand 5 minutes. Pour scalded milk over sugar, shortening, and salt in a bowl. When lukewarm, blend in raisins and 1 cup flour. Stir in yeast and beat well. Add 3 cups flour, continue beating until smooth. Beat in enough remaining flour to make a soft dough. Turn on lightly floured surface; let rest about 5 minutes. Knead until smooth and elastic. Place dough in a greased bowl; turn to bring greased surface to top. Cover, let stand in warm place until dough is doubled, about 1 hour. Punch down, cover, and let rise again until almost doubled in bulk. Turn on lightly floured surface. Divide dough in half; let rest 5 to 10 minutes. Shape into loaves. Place in 2 greased loaf pans 9 1/2 x 5 1/4 x 2 3/4 inches. Cover and let rise until doubled, about 1 hour. Bake in a 400 degree F (205 degrees C) oven for about 50 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Layer cheese, onions and mushrooms inside pie shell. Whisk together egg whites, yolks, flour and milk. Pour egg mixture on top of cheese and vegetables. Poke the layers gently to allow the egg mixture to distribute evenly throughout the quiche. Sprinkle the thyme, salt and pepper on top of the eggs. Bake in preheated oven for 30 minutes, or until eggs are set and top is golden brown.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13 inch baking pan. In a large skillet, melt 2 tablespoons butter over medium heat. Saute onion and celery until onion is soft and translucent.  Stir in the ham and continue to saute until the vegetables are tender and the ham is heated through. Add the chicken broth, water and the remaining 1/2 cup butter or margarine and heat until the butter is completely melted. Place the stuffing mix in a large bowl. Pour the contents of the skillet over the stuffing and toss together gently until mixed. Turn the mixture into the prepared baking pan. Cover pan with aluminum foil and bake in preheated oven for 25 minutes, until heated through. Remove from the oven and make 6 evenly spaced indentations big enough for each to hold an egg.  Take care not to leave a bare spot at the bottom of the indentations.  Carefully break an egg into each indentation, leaving the yolks whole.  Return to the oven, uncovered, and bake another 12 to 14 minutes, until whites of the eggs are nearly set. Remove from the oven again and sprinkle evenly with the cheese and then dust with paprika.  Continue to bake for another 3 to 4 minutes, or until cheese is melted and whites of the eggs are just set, but yolks are still soft. Serve hot, with one egg in each serving.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until evenly brown. Drain off grease and add eggs. Cook eggs and sausage together until eggs are set. Place pizza crust on a pizza pan or baking sheet. Spread crust with ricotta cheese leaving the outer edge of the crust bare. Spread the egg and sausage mixture over the ricotta cheese. Sprinkle with onion, tomato, red pepper and green pepper. Top with mozzarella. Bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes, or until cheese and edges of crust are golden brown.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place raisins in a bowl and cover with boiling water; set aside for 5 to 10 minutes. Drain well and dry raisins in cloth, set aside. Place sausage in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium-high heat until lightly brown. Drain, crumble into small pieces and set aside. In a large bowl, combine sausage, white sugar and brown sugar; stir until mixture is well blended.  Add eggs and beat well. In a separate bowl, sift together flour, ginger, baking powder and pumpkin pie spice. Stir baking soda into coffee. Add flour mixture and coffee alternately to meat mixture, beating well after each addition.  Fold raisins and walnuts into cake batter. Turn batter into well-greased and floured Bundt cake pan. Bake in preheated oven for 75 to 90 minutes until done. Cool 15 minutes in pan before turning out onto serving platter.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Cut each slice of bread into 4 triangles. Place them on a baking sheet, and bake for about 10 minutes, or until toasted. Allow to cool, then spread pesto onto one side of each piece of bread. Set aside. Melt the butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Add the mushrooms; cook and stir until all of the liquid has evaporated. Add the onions; cook and stir for a couple of minutes, then pour in the sherry. Simmer for 1 minute. Place half of the bread triangles into a greased 9x13 inch baking dish with the pesto side facing up. Sprinkle half of the cheese over the bread. Spread the shrimp and crabmeat over the cheese. Top with the mushroom and onion mixture, then sprinkle all but 1/2 cup of the remaining cheese over the mushrooms. Cover with the other half of the bread so that the pesto side is facing down. In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs, half-and-half, salt, and cayenne pepper. Pour over the entire casserole. Cover and refrigerate for at least 2 and up to 24 hours. Remove from the refrigerator for one hour before baking. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Combine the 1 cup of reserved cheese with the panko crumbs in a plastic bag. Shake to blend, and sprinkle over the top of the casserole. Bake uncovered for 55 to 60 minutes in the preheated oven, or until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean. Let stand for 15 minutes before serving. Garnish with fresh tomato and basil or chives.
In a blender or food processor, blend the kiwis, banana, tangelos, berries, yogurt, and soy milk. Gradually blend in the sugar to taste. Serve in tall glasses with fresh mint.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Sprinkle the swiss cheese onto the bottom of the pie shell, and set aside. Heat the olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Stir in the onion and garlic, and cook until the onion has softened and turned translucent, about 5 minutes.  Add the zucchini, tomatoes, and herbes de Provence, and cook 3 minutes more; season the mixture with salt and pepper to taste. Turn the heat to medium-low, cover, and cook until the vegetables are tender, about 20 minutes. Spread the vegetable mixture into the pie shell over the shredded cheese, and flatten the top. Whisk together the eggs and milk, and pour over the vegetable mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until the custard has set, about 20 minutes.
Bring water to a boil in a small saucepan.  Stir in rice, cover pan, and remove from heat.  Allow to stand until water is absorbed, about 5 minutes.  Stir in butter and salt, if desired. Spray a 9 inch pie pan with nonstick cooking spray.  Spoon cooked rice into pan.  Use the back of a spoon to firmly press rice along the bottom and sides of the pan to create a crust. Use crust with quiche fillings of choice, and bake as directed for quiche.
Cut the bacon strips in half, and place into a shallow dish with the half-and-half, crisscrossing the bacon in a star pattern. Soak the bacon a minimum of 30 minutes, but no more than 2 hours. This step helps reduce the curling of the bacon during frying, tenderizes it, and adds a wonderful flavor. Stir together the flour, salt, pepper, and sugar in another shallow dish until blended; set aside. When the bacon has finished soaking, remove it from the half-and-half, and shake off the excess. Press each piece into the flour mixture to coat, then set aside. If desired, you can place a sheet of wax paper between the rows of bacon once the plate is coved. However, the flour does a good job of keeping the bacon from sticking to each other. Heat the vegetable oil in a deep skillet over medium-low heat. Fry the bacon in batches until browned and cooked to desired degree of crispness, 2 to 3 minutes. Drain on a paper towel.
Mix together the pork, soy sauce, brandy, 1 teaspoon sugar, and cornstarch in a bowl, then cover with plastic wrap, and marinate in the refrigerator 4 to 6 hours. Beat the eggs together with the salt, and set aside. Heat half of the oil in a wok over medium-high heat. Pour in the eggs, and cook until they just begin to coagulate, but are still very raw. Remove from the wok and set aside. Heat the remaining vegetable oil in the wok over high heat. Stir in the tomatoes and remaining 1 teaspoon of sugar. Cover, and allow to simmer until the tomatoes have softened, about 7 minutes. Mash the tomatoes until the mixture resembles a chunky soup. Stir in the marinated pork, and cook 3 to 4 minutes until the pork is no longer pink in the center. Gently fold in the eggs and green onions. Continue cooking uncovered 2 minutes more to cook the eggs.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Whisk together eggs, milk, blue cheese dressing, and cornstarch in a bowl until smooth. Fold in spinach, tuna, bacon, and Swiss cheese until evenly mixed. Pour into pie shell. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, 30 to 35 minutes.
Combine the orange juice, banana, peach, honeydew melon, yogurt, sugar, and ice in a blender. Blend until smooth, or chunky, as desired. Pour into two glasses and serve.
Grease a 2-quart baking dish. Toss together the bread cubes, crabmeat, Swiss cheese, Cheddar cheese, capers, and green onions in the baking dish. Mix together eggs, milk, sherry, mustard, and Worcestershire sauce in a bowl. Pour evenly over bread mixture. Cover tightly and refrigerate at least 2 hours, but no longer than 24 hours. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake strata uncovered until knife inserted in the center comes out clean, about 45 minutes. Let stand 10 minutes before serving. Serve while still hot.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Melt 1 tablespoon of butter in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Stir in garlic, and cook for 30 seconds until fragrant. Add mushrooms, and continue cooking until softened and lightly browned, 4 to 6 minutes. Season with salt and pepper, then set aside to cool. Meanwhile, spread softened butter onto one side of each slice of bread. Press the buttered sides into a muffin tin; set aside. Stir together eggs and cream, then stir in the cooled mushroom mixture. Divide this custard equally among the toast cups. Sprinkle the tops with grated Parmesan cheese. Bake in preheated oven until egg mixture sets, and tops are golden brown, about 20 minutes.
Place the watermelon, honeydew, cantaloupe, and ice in a blender.  Pour in the lemon-lime soda and puree until smooth.
Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat. Gently fry potato farls for 2 to 3 minutes on each side or until golden brown. Season with salt and serve immediately.
Crumble the sausage into a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir until browned.  Drain grease, and mix in the cream cheese, cayenne pepper, parsley and mushrooms. Remove from the heat, and allow to cool. Chill in the refrigerator for about 1 hour. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Unroll the crescent roll dough, and separate at the perforations. Stretch each one out as large as you can without breaking, and place a large spoonful of the sausage mixture at the large end. Wrap up like a diaper: fold in the sides, and roll towards the point. Press any openings together to seal. Place on a baking sheet. Bake for 16 to 20 minutes in the preheated oven, until golden brown.
Melt the butter in a skillet over medium-low heat, and cook the onion and garlic 20 minutes, until soft and golden brown. Arrange 1/2 the bread cubes in the bottom of a 9x13 inch baking pan. Layer with 1/2 the blue cheese and the onion mixture. Top with remaining bread cubes and cheese. In a small bowl, whisk together the eggs, egg yolks, heavy cream, salt and pepper. Pour over top layer of bread cubes in pan. Set aside for 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 375  degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake pudding 40 minutes in the preheated oven. Cover pan and continue baking 15 minutes, or until set and golden brown. Allow to sit 15 minutes before serving.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Bring the water to a boil in a large saucepan over high heat. Slowly pour the grits into the water while stirring constantly. Reduce heat to medium-low, and simmer until the grits are tender and thick, 3 to 4 minutes. Stir the grits constantly as they cook. Set aside. Heat a skillet over medium-high heat, and sprinkle in the grated luncheon meat. Cook, turning occasionally, until the luncheon meat has browned. Pour off any excess grease, and stir half of the luncheon meat into the grits along with the tomatoes, sour cream, and half of the Cheddar cheese. Pour the grits into the prepared baking dish, and sprinkle with the remaining luncheon meat and Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until the casserole is hot and the cheese has melted and is bubbly, about 30 minutes.
Place ice, avocado, maple syrup, milk, sweetened condensed milk, and vanilla powder into a blender. Puree until smooth.
Place the strawberries, bananas, raspberries, yogurt, lemonade mix, and ice cubes into a blender. Pour in the vodka, rum, whiskey, cherry vodka. Puree until smooth, and pour into two large glasses to serve.
Bring the water, butter, sugar, buttermilk powder, and salt to a simmer in a saucepan over low heat. Remove from the heat, mix well, and let cool to between 105 and 110 degrees F (41 to 43 degrees C). Sprinkle the yeast on top of the mixture, and let stand for about 10 minutes, until the yeast begins to form a creamy foam. Stir in the instant mashed potato flakes, and mix well. Pour the yeast mixture into the work bowl of a standing mixer with a dough paddle, and slowly incorporate 8 cups of bread flour into the liquid, adding the flour 1 cup at a time. Turn the dough out onto a floured surface, and knead for about 8 minutes, adding the remaining flour to the dough as you knead. When the dough is smooth and elastic, form into a ball, and place into a large greased bowl. Turn the dough over in the bowl to grease the top, cover with a cloth, and let rise in a warm place for about 1 hour, until doubled. Spray 2 9x5 inch loaf pans with cooking spray. Punch the dough down, divide into two pieces, and shape each piece into a loaf shape. Place the loaves in the baking pans, seam sides down, cover with a cloth, and let rise in a warm place until doubled, about 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake bread for 30 minutes in the preheated oven, until the tops are golden brown and the loaves sound hollow when tapped. Remove from pans to a wire rack to cool.
In a 2 gallon container, mix together the brown sugar, curing mixture, and water. Submerge the pork belly in the mixture so that it is covered completely. If the meat floats, you can weigh it down with a dinner plate or similar object. Refrigerate covered for six days. Light charcoal in an outdoor smoker. Soak wood chips in a bowl of water. When the temperature of the smoker is between 140 and 150 degrees coals are ready. Smoke the pork belly for 6 hours, throwing a handful of wood chips on the coals about once an hour. Store in the refrigerator. Slice and fry as you would with store-bought bacon.
Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil.  Add potatoes, and cook until tender but still firm, about 15 minutes. Drain, cool and shred. In a medium saucepan over medium heat, mix milk, butter and garlic. Bring to a gentle boil, then mix in potatoes, ham and Cheddar cheese. Season with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally, until the mixture reaches a dough-like consistency. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium high heat. Drop potato mixture by rounded spoonfuls into the oil, and cook, turning once, until lightly browned on both sides.
Preheat waffle iron. In a medium bowl, mix together the eggs, milk and oil. Combine the flour, salt and baking powder; stir into the milk mixture until it makes a smooth batter. Stir in corned beef. Spoon batter onto your waffle iron, close the lid, and cook until the waffle iron stops steaming and waffles are golden. Serve hot with butter.
In a large bowl, combine milk, egg, cinnamon and sugar. Soak bread in the egg mixture. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Cook until bread slices are golden brown on both sides.  Sprinkle with brown sugar and serve hot.
Mix together flour, sugar, baking powder and cheese. In a separate bowl, beat together egg, milk and oil. Stir egg mixture into flour mixture until just combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or frying pan over medium high heat. Pour or scoop the batter onto the griddle, using approximately 1/4 cup for each pancake. Brown on both sides and serve hot.
Combine boiling water, oats, shortening, brown sugar, salt, and molasses.  Allow to cool. Stir 1/2 cup warm water and 1 teaspoon white sugar until sugar is dissolved.  Sprinkle yeast over this mixture, and proof while oats are cooling. Add 3 cups of warm water to the cooled oat mixture.  Stir in yeast.  Begin stirring in flour 1 cup at a time until it begins to get hard to stir.  Dredge raisins in flour, and mix with cinnamon; mix into the dough.  Turn onto a lightly floured surface, and knead in enough flour to make a soft but not sticky dough.  Cover.  Let rise for 1 to 2 hours in a warm place, or until dough doubles in size. Divide dough into 5 parts.  Shape loaves, and place into greased 9 x 5 inch loaf pans. Bake in a preheated 375 degree F (190 degree C) oven for 20 minutes.  Reduce heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C), and bake an additional 20 minutes.  Cool on wire racks.
In a small bowl, dissolve yeast in warm water. Let stand until creamy, about 10 minutes. In a large bowl, mix together flour, sugar and salt. Make a well in the center of the flour and pour in the yeast mixture, egg yolks, margarine and warm milk. Stir until a soft dough is formed. Turn it out onto a lightly floured surface and knead until smooth and supple, about 6 minutes. Lightly oil a large bowl, place the dough in the bowl and turn to coat with oil. Cover with a damp cloth and let rise in a warm place until doubled in volume, about 1 hour. Deflate the dough and turn it out onto a lightly floured surface. Knead in the raisins. Divide the dough into two equal pieces and form into loaves. Place the loaves into two lightly greased 9x5 inch loaf pans. Cover the loaves with a damp cloth and let rise until doubled in volume, about 40 minutes. Meanwhile, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Brush the risen loaves with egg whites. Bake in preheated oven for 30 to 45 minutes, until golden brown.
Place ingredients in the pan of the bread machine in the order recommended by the manufacturer. Select basic bread setting, light/medium crust setting; press Start. If your machine has a Fruit setting, add the raisins and at the signal, or about 5 minutes before the kneading cycle has finished.
Wash and peal potatoes. If using large potatoes cut them in half. Place potatoes in a medium sauce pan covered with water. Cook over medium heat until tender, about 20 minutes. Drain, cool, and mash. In a large mixing bowl, combine 1 1/2 cup mashed potatoes with butter or margarine, eggs, buttermilk and vanilla; beat until smooth. In another bowl, sift together flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt. Gradually add flour mixture to the potato mixture; stirring until well combined. Refrigerate batter for 1 hour. Fill a 2 to 4 quart sauce pan 1 to 2 inches deep with vegetable oil and heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Form the chilled batter in 1 tablespoon size balls. Use a spoon to carefully slide the potato balls into the hot oil. Let cook until brown, turn, and cook opposite side. Remove from oil, briefly drain on paper towels, and roll in powdered sugar. Serve hot.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Put butter in a 9x13-inch casserole dish and place in the oven until butter melts and starts to brown, about 5 minutes. Place eggs in a blender and pulse until smooth; add coconut milk, arrowroot powder, chestnut flour, lemon extract, stevia powder, and sea salt. Blend until smooth, 45 to 60 seconds. Pour batter over browned butter in the casserole dish. Bake in the preheated oven until pancake is set in the middle and edges are lightly browned, about 23 minutes.
Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Beat eggs, milk, flour, sugar, cinnamon, vanilla, nutmeg, and salt in a large bowl with a hand mixer until smooth; add bread cubes and stir until well coated. Pour bread mixture into prepared baking dish. Top evenly with blueberries, pecans, and cream cheese cubes. Cover dish with plastic wrap and refrigerate 2 to 24 hours. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Bake uncovered in preheated oven until golden brown, 20 to 25 minutes.
Trim crusts from bread; reserve crusts. Cover bottom of greased 13 x 9-inch (33 x 23 cm) baking dish with slices of bread, trimming to fit if necessary. Cover with ham, then cheese. Top with another layer of bread. Whisk eggs. Add onion, green pepper, dry mustard, pepper, Worcestershire sauce and Tabasco; whisk to combine. Whisk in milk. Pour mixture over bread. Cover and refrigerate overnight. Meanwhile, pulse reserved crusts in food processor until coarsely chopped. Set aside 1-1/2 cups of the bread crumbs. (Remainder can be frozen for another use.) The next day, stir butter into bread crumbs until moistened. Sprinkle buttered crumbs over top of casserole. Bake in a preheated 350 degrees F (180 degrees F) oven until puffed, set and golden brown, about 1 to 1-1/4 hours.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Heat olive oil in a skillet and cook and stir apple-chicken sausage, sweet potatoes, celery, red onion, red bell pepper, and garlic in the hot oil until vegetables are cooked through but not soft, about 15 minutes. Transfer to a large bowl and season with salt and black pepper. Stir grape halves into sausage mixture. Mix cream cheese, blue cheese, and rosemary in a bowl. Place sheets of puff pastry onto a large baking sheet. Use a rolling pin to flatten the puff pastry sheets and join them along a long edge into one large sheet. Starting with a long edge, use a sharp knife to cut strips into pastry about 1 1/2 inches apart and 3 inches deep. Repeat cutting strips into the opposite long edge, leaving a fringe of cut pastry strips on each opposite edge and an uncut wide strip of pastry in the middle. Spread filling evenly down the uncut center of the pastry sheet; drop spoonfuls of blue cheese mixture over the filling. Braid the pastry by lifting a left and right pastry strip, crossing the two strips over the filling, and twisting one time to join. Repeat braiding the pastry all down the roll, crossing opposite pairs of strips over the filling and twisting one time. Sprinkle the pastry with sliced almonds. Bake in the preheated oven until the filling is hot and the pastry is golden brown, about 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F. Place 3 tablespoons butter into a 9 inch square baking dish or a 9 inch cast iron pan and melt in oven, about 3 to 5 minutes. Whisk together the eggs, milk and vanilla in a medium bowl. In a large bowl, combine the flour, salt, cinnamon and sugar. Whisk egg mixture into flour mixture. Batter may appear a bit lumpy. Carefully pour batter into hot baking dish or pan and return it to oven. Bake 12 to 15 minutes or until pancake rises high and edges are golden brown. For sauce, melt butter in a medium skillet over medium heat. Add banana slices and cook for 2 minutes or until bananas are just golden. Add Marzetti Old Fashioned Caramel Dip and cream and stir until thoroughly heated. Spoon or slice pancake into pieces and serve on plates with caramel banana sauce. Serve with optional toppings.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil. Place a wire rack on top of baking sheet; place bacon strips on wire rack. Bake in the preheated oven for 10 minutes; remove from oven and sprinkle tops of bacon strips with half the brown sugar. Return to oven and bake 10 more minutes. Remove from oven and flip bacon to other side; sprinkle with remaining brown sugar and bake until bacon is crisp and brown sugar is golden brown, 10 to 15 more minutes. Remove bacon, let cool, and crumble into small pieces. Lightly grease a skillet with vegetable oil and place over medium-high heat. Whisk flour, white sugar, and baking powder in a large bowl; in a separate bowl, whisk beer, melted butter, salt, and vanilla extract. Lightly stir the liquid ingredients into the flour mixture to make a smooth batter. Stir candied bacon pieces into the batter. Pour batter into the hot skillet 1/2 cup at a time and cook until edges are browned, about 2 minutes; flip pancake and cook until golden brown and the center is set, 3 to 5 more minutes.
Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Fry the potato in the hot oil until fork-tender, 5 to 7 minutes. Transfer the potatoes to a plate lined with paper towels and set aside. Return the skillet to medium heat. Cook the onion and garlic in the remaining oil until tender, about 5 minutes. Add the crab to the skillet and season with salt and pepper; stir. Cover the skillet and cook for 2 minutes. Stir the tomatoes into the mixture and cook another 2 minutes. Add the raisins, peas, and red bell pepper to the mixture; stir and cook another 2 minutes. Pour the eggs over the mixture. Cook until he eggs set, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip the omelet and cook 1 minute more. Transfer to a serving plate and serve hot.
Whisk together the flour, baking powder, and sea salt; set aside. Whisk together the tofu, soy milk, canola oil, and water. Gradually whisk the flour mixture into the tofu mixture, making sure to beat out all lumps between additions. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, and cook until lightly browned on the bottom. Flip, and cook until lightly browned on the other side. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat the oven's broiler and set the oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source. Prepare an oven-safe skillet with cooking spray and place over medium heat. Whisk the egg whites, eggs, and 1/2 cup of the Cheddar cheese together in a bowl. Cook the egg mixture in the hot skillet until the bottom of the eggs turn opaque, about 1 minute. Cover the skillet with a lid and cook until the eggs are nearly set, 4 to 5 minutes more. Spread the diced tomatoes with chiles and the remaining cheese over the eggs. Move the skillet to the oven and cook under the broiler until the eggs finish setting and the cheese is completely melted, 2 to 3 minutes. Allow the frittata to rest 5 minutes before slicing to serve.
Place the bacon in a large, deep skillet, and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on a paper towel-lined plate. Place sausage into the bacon grease, and cook until crumbly and brown, about 10 minutes. Place the sausage on the plate with the bacon, and pour off all but 1/4 cup of the bacon drippings. Reduce heat to medium, and stir in the onion, garlic, and one can of green chiles. Cook and stir until the onion has softened and turned translucent, about 10 minutes. Meanwhile, beat the eggs in a large mixing bowl with the liquid smoke, hot pepper sauce, seasoned salt, white pepper, parsley, and basil until smooth. Crumble the bacon, and stir bacon and sausage into the eggs with the remaining can of green chiles, hash browns, and cooked onions. Season to taste with salt and black pepper, and stir until evenly mixed. Prepare a 9x13-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Scoop the hash brown mixture into the prepared dish, and smooth the top. Cover with aluminum foil, and refrigerate overnight. Preheat an oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Bake the covered dish in the preheated oven for 1 hour. Remove the casserole from the oven, uncover, and sprinkle evenly with pepper Jack and Monterey Jack cheeses. Sprinkle the Cheddar cheese in the shape of a cross, and outline with the black olives. Return to the oven, and bake until the cheese is hot and bubbly, 20 to 30 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Press the puff pastry sheet into an 8-inch round or square pan. Bake in the preheated oven until the bottom of the pastry is very lightly browned, about 10 minutes. Mix together the chicken, 4 chopped plums, chicken broth, mace, cinnamon, and cloves in a bowl, and season to taste with salt and pepper. Spoon the mixture over the partially-baked crust, and arrange slices of 2 plums over the top. Drizzle the pie with melted butter, and sprinkle with brown sugar. Bake the pie in the oven until the crust is golden brown and the plum slices have caramelized, about 40 minutes.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Brush the bottom of a springform pan with 1 tablespoon olive oil. Cook and stir bread crumbs and 1 tablespoon olive oil together in a skillet over medium heat until breadcrumbs are light golden, 1 to 2 minutes. Stir 1 tablespoon Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese into breadcrumbs; cook and stir until golden brown and toasted, about 1 minute more. Spread breadcrumbs out into the bottom of the prepared springform pan. Beat eggs in a bowl with a whisk until pale yellow, thick, and frothy. Add basil, parsley, salt, black pepper, cayenne pepper, and nutmeg; stir to combine. Whisk ricotta cheese and 1 ounce Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese into egg mixture. Drop cheese mixture by spoonfuls into the prepared springform pan and spread it evenly over breadcrumbs. Gently tap the pan against a work surface to settle the cheese layer. Sprinkle 2 tablespoons Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese and drizzle 1 tablespoon olive oil over the top. Bake in the preheated oven until set, 20 to 25 minutes. Run a paring knife around the side to release tart from springform pan. Cool in the pan until cool enough to handle; remove springform pan ring. Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Line a baking sheet with a wire rack. Place tart on prepared baking sheet and bake in the preheated broiler until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes.
Blend peaches, coconut milk, yogurt, and milk together in a blender until smooth.
Blend cherries, mango, water, and ice cubes together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Press pie crust into a 9-inch pie dish. Beat eggs, bacon, mozzarella cheese, milk, flour, garlic, parsley, and thyme together in a bowl until evenly combined. Arrange 1/2 of the spinach in the bottom of the pie crust; sprinkle artichoke hearts over spinach layer. Pour egg mixture over artichoke hearts. Layer the remaining spinach over egg mixture; top with tomato slices. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted in the center of the quiche comes out clean, about 45 minutes.
Blend strawberries, Greek yogurt, mango, milk, and protein powder together until smooth. Add mint leaves and pulse until leaves are chopped, 4 to 5 pulses.
Process oats in a food processor until finely ground. Mix oats, flour, baking soda, baking powder, salt, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a bowl. Whisk buttermilk, milk, sugar, 1/4 cup vegetable oil, and egg in a separate bowl until smooth; mix into oat mixture until batter is well-mixed, about 30 strokes. Fold raisins and walnuts into batter. Lightly oil a skillet or griddle and place over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 4 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Spread 1 tablespoon peanut butter and 1 tablespoon jam onto one side of each of six bread slices; top each with another bread slice to make 6 sandwiches. Whisk milk, eggs, sugar, raspberry-flavored liqueur, and vanilla extract together in a bowl until smooth. Dip each sandwich into egg mixture, turning to coat both sides. Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook sandwiches, working in batches, until golden brown, 3 to 4 minutes per side.
Bring water to a boil in a saucepan; add oats, pumpkin puree, vanilla extract, 1/4 teaspoon, cinnamon, and ginger. Reduce heat to low and simmer, without stirring, until oatmeal is thickened, about 25 minutes. Pour 3/4 cup milk into oatmeal, stir well, and cook for 10 minutes more. Spoon oatmeal into serving bowls and top with remaining 5 tablespoons milk, brown sugar, and 1/4 teaspoon cinnamon.
Sift flour, baking powder, and sugar together in a bowl; pour in milk and butter and mix well. Stir eggs and vanilla extract into flour mixture until batter is smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion in melted butter until slightly softened, about 2 minutes. Add pork and continue to cook for 2 minutes more. Stir potatoes into pork mixture and toss. Cook until potatoes are browned, stirring occasionally, about 5 minutes. Season with salt, black pepper, and cayenne pepper.
Heat 1 tablespoon avocado oil in a wok or skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir eggs in the hot oil until mostly cooked through, about 1 minute. Transfer eggs to a plate. Pour remaining 1 tablespoon avocado oil into wok; cook and stir tomatoes until liquid has mostly evaporated, about 2 minutes. Return eggs to wok and add green onions; cook and stir until eggs are fully cooked, about 30 more seconds.
Whisk almond milk, vinegar, and lemon juice together in a bowl; set aside for 10 minutes. Mix rice flour, potato starch, arrowroot flour, tapioca flour, coconut sugar, baking powder, baking soda, xanthan gum, and salt together in a bowl. Stir coconut oil into flour mixture using a fork until evenly combined. Stir eggs into flour mixture. Whisk milk mixture into flour mixture until batter is thoroughly mixed. Heat a lightly oiled skillet or large pan over medium heat. Pour 1/4 cup batter into the skillet and immediately rotate the skillet until the batter evenly coats the bottom in a thin layer. Cook until the top of the crepe is no longer wet and the bottom has turned light brown, 2 to 3 minutes. Run a spatula around the edge of the skillet to loosen; flip crepe and cook until the other side has turned light brown, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Mix self-rising cornmeal, egg, and buttermilk together in a bowl to make a smooth batter. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat; pour about 1/4 cup of batter into the hot butter and cook pancake until browned and bubbles appear on the surface, about 5 minutes. Flip and cook until set and other side is browned, 2 to 3 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Beat eggs and milk in a bowl. Melt butter in a large, oven-safe skillet over medium heat; cook and stir potatoes, ham, onion, and garlic in melted butter until potatoes are tender, about 15 minutes. Add water if vegetables become dry. Season with salt and pepper. Pour egg mixture over vegetable mixture. Cook, without stirring, until eggs are slightly browned on the bottom. Broil in the preheated oven until eggs are nearly set, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese over eggs and continue broiling until frittata is completely set and cheese is melted, about 5 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 3-quart baking dish. Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir mushrooms, onion, and bell pepper in hot oil until onions are translucent, about 5 minutes. Transfer vegetables to a large bowl. Stir hash brown potatoes, ham, cream of chicken soup, sour cream, about 3/4 cup Cheddar cheese, and about 3/4 cup Parmesan cheese into vegetables. Spread potato mixture into the prepared baking dish. Sprinkle remaining 1/4 cup Cheddar cheese and 1/4 cup Parmesan cheese over potato mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until bubbly and cheese is melted, 40 to 45 minutes. Let stand for 5 minutes before serving.
Blend banana, orange juice, mango, pineapple, coconut water, lime juice, mint in a blender until smooth.
Blend bananas, almond milk, ice, peanut butter, wheat germ, flax seed, and honey in a blender until smooth.
Add chocolate drink powder, yogurt, milk, ice, and peanut butter to a blender. Blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F and spread 1 tablespoon butter onto the bottom and sides of an 11 x 7-inch baking dish. Cut each roll into 3 slices (you should have 10 cups, loosely measured). Place on a baking sheet and bake for 5 minutes or until lightly toasted. Sprinkle some of the blueberries into the dish and arrange roll slices in rows. Sprinkle with remaining blueberries, tucking some between the roll slices. Melt remaining butter and whisk together with Almond Breeze, sugar, extracts, and eggs. Pour over bread, then cover and refrigerate overnight. Remove French toast from refrigerator and preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Bake for 45 to 55 minutes or until firm when the dish is gently tapped. Serve warm, dusted with powdered sugar.
Heat oil in a nonstick skillet over medium-high heat until shimmering. Add potatoes, onion, garlic powder, and onion powder to one side of the skillet and season with salt and pepper. Add chorizo sausage on the other side of the skillet and saute, breaking up with the back of a spoon, until browned, about 5 minutes. Turn over the potatoes after a couple of minutes so they get brown on both sides. Combine eggs, milk, 1 tablespoon cilantro, salt, and pepper in a bowl. Reduce heat and pour egg mixture into the skillet. Stir eggs until they are very softly set, about 3 minutes. Remove from heat. Spread out warmed tortillas and divide potato, chorizo, and egg mixture among them. Sprinkle with remaining 2 tablespoons cilantro. Top with Cheddar cheese and salsa.
Heat 1 tablespoon butter and oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir chicken until no longer pink in the center, about 5 minutes. Transfer to a plate. Melt remaining 1/4 cup butter in the same skillet over medium heat. Add mushrooms and onion; cook and stir until softened, about 5 minutes. Stir in 1/4 cup flour and cook for 2 minutes. Reduce heat to low. Add 2 cups milk, chicken bouillon cubes, salt, and pepper; cook and stir until thickened into a sauce, about 5 minutes. Stir in sour cream and sherry. Scoop 1 cup sauce into a bowl; keep warm. Stir chicken and 1 teaspoon parsley into remaining sauce in the skillet. Simmer until chicken is heated through, about 5 minutes. Beat 1 cup milk, 3/4 cup flour, egg, 1 tablespoon melted butter, sugar, vanilla extract, and baking powder together in a bowl to make crepe batter. Grease a 7-inch skillet lightly; heat over medium heat. Pour 2 tablespoons batter into the skillet, swirling to spread evenly. Cook crepe until golden brown, about 30 seconds per side. Transfer crepe to a plate. Repeat with remaining batter, separating crepes with waxed paper and covering to keep warm. Scoop 1/4 cup chicken mixture onto each crepe and roll up. Spoon reserved 1 cup sauce over filled crepes. Garnish with remaining 1 teaspoon parsley.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir turkey in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Unroll crescent roll dough and spread evenly over the bottom of the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven for 10 minutes. Mix sausage and eggs together in a bowl. Add Cheddar cheese, mozzarella cheese, milk, red bell pepper, spinach, scallion, parsley, salt, and pepper, stirring well after each addition. Pour egg mixture over the baked crescent rolls. Bake in the oven until eggs are set, 25 to 30 minutes.
Fill an ice cube tray with coffee and freeze 4 hours or until completely frozen. Reserve remaining chilled coffee. In a blender, place 1 cup coffee ice cubes along with 3/4 cup chilled coffee, banana, creamer, coconut oil, cocoa powder, and Stevia In The Raw. Blend until smooth.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Grease with cooking spray. Combine oats and almond milk in a large bowl. Whisk egg yolk and butter together in a small bowl; stir into oat mixture. Beat egg white in a glass, metal, or ceramic bowl until stiff peaks form. Stir brown sugar and baking powder into the oat mixture. Fold beaten egg white gently into the batter. Scoop 1/2 cup batter onto the preheated iron and spread to the edges. Close iron and cook until iron stops steaming, about 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Spray slow cooker with non-stick cooking spray. In medium bowl combine eggs and cream; whisk until well combined. Sprinkle onion powder, salt and both peppers over egg mixture while whisking. Whisk until completely combined. Set aside. In slow cooker, combine hash browns and about 1/2 of each of Parmesan cheese, mozzarella cheese, sausage, sun-dried tomatoes and basil. Using fingers, gently toss until combined. Pour egg mixture over top; if necessary use spatula to smooth out top. Set aside about 1/2 of remaining mozzarella cheese (approximately 2 ounces). Sprinkle remaining ingredients over top of casserole. Cover slow cooker and cook for 6-8 hours on low or until center is cooked through. A thermometer inserted into center should read 160 degrees F. Sprinkle casserole with remaining cheese, serve and enjoy!
In medium saucepan, bring milk, sugar, salt and spices to gentle boil (watch carefully); stir in oats. Return to boil; reduce heat to medium. Cook 1 minute for quick oats, 5 minutes for old fashioned oats, or until most of liquid is absorbed, stirring occasionally. Remove oatmeal from heat. Stir in mashed bananas and pecans. Spoon oatmeal into six cereal bowls. Top with yogurt, sliced bananas and pecan halves, if desired.
Mix flour, baking powder, ginger, cinnamon, salt, baking soda, and pumpkin pie spice together in a bowl. Whisk eggs in a separate bowl until smooth. Mix in milk, molasses, coconut oil, and vanilla extract. Whisk flour mixture into milk mixture until batter is combined; a few lumps are okay. Grease a griddle lightly with oil; preheat over medium-low heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Spray 2 mini muffin tins with cooking spray. Mix milk and vinegar together in a bowl; let stand until milk curdles, about 5 minutes. Beat in oil and egg. Combine flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a bowl; stir into milk mixture until smooth. Spoon batter into the prepared muffin tins with a tablespoon or a small batter scoop. Bake in the preheated oven until batter is risen and still pale, about 8 minutes. Remove from muffin cups with a silicone scraper.
Heat oven to 375 degrees F. Coat 6 muffin cups generously with butter. Beat eggs and cream in medium bowl. Stir in quinoa, cheese, broccoli, onion and garlic salt. Divide mixture evenly into prepared muffin cups. Bake 19 to 21 minutes or until golden brown. Let stand 5 minutes before removing from pan.
Combine oats and 2/3 cup almond milk in a bowl; refrigerate until oats have absorbed the liquid, 8 hours to overnight. Combine oats-almond milk mixture, remaining almond milk, banana, 1 cup blueberries, vanilla extract, and maple syrup in a blender; blend until smooth. Pour smoothie into 2 bowls and top with coconut, 1 tablespoon blueberries, and chia seeds.
Combine water, coconut milk, pineapple chunks, ice, honey, and vanilla protein powder in a blender. Blend until smooth, 1 to 2 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 9x5-inch loaf pans. Mix flour, sugar, squash, oil, pineapple, nuts, eggs, vanilla extract, cinnamon, baking soda, salt, and baking powder together in a bowl; pour into prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the middle comes out clean, about 1 hour. Cool bread for 10 minutes in pan before transferring to a wire rack to cool completely.
Place bananas, raspberries, pecans, coconut oil, flax meal, and date in a blender; add water. Blend until smooth.
Brush the inside of a microwave-safe mug with butter. Crack eggs into mug and top with ricotta cheese, tomatoes, and basil; season with salt, pepper, and oregano. Cook in the microwave for 1 minute; stir and continue cooking in 15-second intervals, until set, about 1 minute more. Sprinkle Parmesan cheese over eggs.
Blend bananas, ice cubes, milk, cocoa powder, peanut butter, and vanilla extract together in a blender on high speed until smooth.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease two 9x5-inch loaf pans. Mix flour, cinnamon, salt, baking soda, baking powder, and nutmeg together in a bowl. Beat sugar, applesauce, eggs, oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl; stir in zucchini. Slowly mix flour mixture into zucchini mixture until well blended; pour into prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, about 50 minutes.
Heat oven to 375 degrees F. Line 9-inch pie plate with pie crust; seal and flute edge. Mix eggs, milk, sour cream and pepper in large bowl until blended. Add remaining ingredients; mix well. Pour into crust. Bake 40 to 45 min. or until knife inserted in center comes out clean.
Bring coconut milk to a gentle boil in a small saucepan over medium-low heat. Stir in oats and honey; lower heat and simmer until milk has mostly been absorbed, about 15 minutes. Sprinkle coconut flakes, brown sugar, and cinnamon into oatmeal. Cook until oats are creamy and flavors are combined, about 5 minutes.
Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Beat eggs, Parmesan cheese, salt, and black pepper together thoroughly in a bowl. Heat olive oil in an oven-safe skillet over medium heat. Add cooked pasta; toss to coat in olive oil. Add beaten eggs, stir, and cook until eggs begin firming up on the sides of the skillet, about 3 minutes. Broil in the preheated oven until eggs are set, 2 to 3 minutes.
Whisk eggs, Parmesan cheese, milk, and black pepper in a shallow bowl until light and fluffy, about 1 minute. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Dip both sides of each slice of bread in the egg mixture and place in the skillet. Cook until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Transfer to a warmed plate and dot with butter to serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8-inch square pan. Combine whole oats, oat flour, brown sugar, salt, and baking soda together in a bowl. Stir in almond milk, eggs, butter, and vanilla extract until well combined. Fold in blueberries and walnuts. Spread mixture into prepared square pan; top with shredded coconut. Bake in the preheated oven until edges are golden and coconut is brown; about 35 minutes. Cool in the pan for 10 minutes before cutting into squares.
Blend strawberries, pineapple, yogurt, coconut water, and acai pulp in a blender until smooth; pour into a bowl. Top smoothie with kiwi, banana, blueberries, raspberries, almonds, granola, and chia seeds.
Run carrots, apples, and celery through a juicer (alternating carrot, apple, and celery) according to manufacturer's instructions. Add ginger to juicer and process.
Toss apple slices with maple syrup in a bowl. Place yogurt in a bowl. Top yogurt with apple mixture, blueberries, and almonds; sprinkle with cinnamon and nutmeg.
Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion until lightly browned, 10 to 12 minutes. Add grated sweet potatoes; cook and stir until tender, about 15 minutes. Increase heat to high and cook sweet potato mixture without stirring for 2 minutes. Reduce heat to medium and stir in bacon, chives, parsley, thyme, salt, and pepper.
Combine oats, coconut sugar, and almond butter in a small jar with a tight-fitting lid (such as a Ball(R) mason jar); cover with lid and store in the refrigerator, 8 hours to overnight. Mix hot water into oat mixture, return lid to jar, and allow to sit, 3 to 5 minutes. Stir well and eat.
Pour 1 cup plus 2 tablespoons cold water into a saucepan over medium-high heat. Add butter, sugar, salt and nutmeg. When mixture starts to simmer, reduce heat to medium and add flour. Cook, stirring constantly, until mixture comes together into a soft dough ball, about 2 minutes. Remove from heat and transfer to a mixing bowl. Pour in vanilla extract. Break up dough with a whisk or fork, and let cool for about 5 minutes. Break an egg into the bowl with the dough and whisk until egg is incorporated and dough becomes smooth and sticky, 4 to 5 minutes. Dough will stick inside the whisk; clean out dough with a spatula before adding successive eggs, 1 at a time. Whisk in each egg until thoroughly incorporated into the dough. Clear dough from whisk; scrape down sides of bowl. Cover dough with plastic wrap and chill for about an hour. Place bacon in cold skillet. Cook over medium heat, stirring occasionally, until bacon is browned and crisp and fat is rendered, 5 to 8 minutes. Transfer bacon pieces to a paper towel-lined plate to drain. When bacon is cool enough to handle, place it on a cutting board and chop into small pieces. Reserve some bacon bits for topping the doughnuts. Heat oil in a deep-fryer or large saucepan to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove dough from refrigerator and stir in bacon pieces. Drop dough by scoopfuls (about 2 tablespoons) into hot oil. Fry in batches to avoid crowding. Fry until dough begins to puff and brown, turning occasionally. After doughnuts expand and crack, keep turning them until they are evenly browned, about 7 minutes. Transfer to paper toweled-lined plate to drain slightly. Serve hot, drizzled with maple syrup and topped with bacon pieces.
Bring water to a boil in a saucepan; add oats and miso paste. Cook for about 1 minute. Add spinach, walnuts, and seaweed to oat mixture; cook, stirring occasionally, until oatmeal is desired consistency, about 5 minutes. Pour oatmeal into a bowl and top with avocado.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch bread pan. Whisk squash, honey, blueberry syrup, oil, egg, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Mix all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, baking soda, baking powder, and salt together in a separate bowl; add blueberries and walnuts. Stir flour mixture into squash mixture just until combined; pour into prepared bread pan. Bake in the preheated oven until the top is brown and a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, about 1 hour.
Combine oat bran, flour, granola, baking powder, and cinnamon in a bowl. Blend apple, banana, milk, egg, and vanilla extract in a blender until smooth; mix into oat bran mixture until batter is well mixed. Gently fold blueberries into batter. Heat a lightly oiled griddle or skillet over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend apple, banana, kiwifruit, milk, ice, chia seeds, and maca powder together in a blender until smooth.
Process the yellow squash through a zoodler (vegetable peeler that forms noodle-shape pieces) until squash zoodles form. Heat butter in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir squash zoodles, spinach, and cilantro until zoodles are tender, 5 to 7 minutes. Spread mixture evenly into the bottom of the skillet. Whisk eggs and milk together in a bowl; pour over squash mixture. Cook until egg is firm, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle mozzarella cheese over egg mixture and cook until cheese is melted, about 5 minutes; season with salt and pepper.
Heat oven to 375 degrees F. Cut tops off rolls; set aside. Make 1-inch-deep indentation in center of bottom half of each roll. Crumble 6 bacon slices; sprinkle into bread bowls. Top with VELVEETA. Crack egg over VELVEETA in each bowl; place on baking sheet. Bake 20 to 25 min. or until egg whites are completely set and yolks begin to thicken but do not become firm, adding tops of rolls, cut-sides up, to baking sheet for the last 5 min. Sprinkle eggs with chives. Replace tops of rolls. Serve with remaining bacon slices.
Combine almond milk, papaya, protein powder, turmeric root, and ginger root in a blender; add ice and blend until smooth.
Blend bananas, pineapple, orange juice, coconut milk, lime juice, turmeric, ginger, nutmeg, and ice cubes together in a blender until smooth.
Blend chia seeds in a blender until powdery, 3 to 5 seconds. Add banana, eggs, flour, cocoa powder, cinnamon, vanilla extract, and sea salt; blend, occasionally scraping sides down, until batter is smooth. Heat a skillet over medium heat; add coconut oil. Pour 1/2 of the batter into the hot oil and sprinkle 1/2 of the blueberries onto the batter. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter and blueberries, using more coconut oil if needed.
Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat; add garam masala, turmeric, coriander, and salt. Cook and stir onion and green chile peppers in the seasoned oil until onion is slightly tender, about 5 minutes. Crack eggs into the skillet and season with salt; cook and stir until eggs are set and scrambled, about 5 minutes.
Blend orange juice, goji berries, and ginger together in a high-powered blender until smooth and goji berries are pureed.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch casserole dish with cooking spray. Spread an even layer of mayonnaise on one side of each slice of bread. Place 6 slices of bread mayonnaise-side down in a single layer at the bottom of the casserole dish. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly toasted, about 5 minutes. Remove from oven and top each slice of bread with 1 slice of Cheddar cheese. Cover with 6 more slices of bread, mayonnaise-side up. Bake in the preheated oven until bread is lightly toasted, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle 1/4 of the shredded Cheddar cheese on top. Arrange slices of ham on top; cover with another 1/4 of the shredded Cheddar cheese. Repeat with bacon slices, covering with another 1/4 of the shredded Cheddar cheese. Arrange last 6 slices of bread, mayonnaise-side up, on top. Whisk eggs, milk, salt, and black pepper together in a large bowl. Pour evenly over bread in the casserole dish. Sprinkle remaining 1/4 cup shredded Cheddar cheese on top. Cover with aluminum foil. Bake in the preheated oven until set, about 30 minutes. Remove aluminum foil and continue baking until cheese is bubbly and golden, 5 to 10 minutes more.
Combine banana, mango, kale, white beans, coconut, and matcha powder in a blender; add water. Blend mixture until very smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Cook bacon in large skillet until crisp. Drain bacon on paper towels; crumble and set aside. Remove all but 2 tablespoons drippings from skillet. Add onion to skillet; cook and and stir 3 minutes or until softened. Spread 1/2 of the bread cubes in 13x9-inch baking dish. Layer with 1/2 each of the onion, bacon, Cheddar cheese and mozzarella cheese. Spread evenly with cottage cheese. Top with remaining bread cubes, onion, bacon, Cheddar cheese and mozzarella cheese. Beat eggs in medium bowl with wire whisk. Add milk, mustard, pepper and nutmeg; mix well. Gradually pour into baking dish. Press bread cubes lightly into egg mixture until completely covered. Let stand 10 minutes. Bake 40 to 50 minutes or until center is set and top is golden brown.
Place 3 to 4 slices of banana in the bottom of a jar. Layer 1 1/2 teaspoon of almond butter, 1/2 teaspoon chia seeds, and 1/2 cup oats on top. Repeat layering remaining almond butter, chia seeds, and oats, leaving a 1-inch gap at the top. Mix almond milk, maple syrup, and vanilla extract in a bowl. Pour over oats, leaving a 1/2-inch gap at the top to allow oats to expands as they soak. Push a knife or fork vertically through the jar to make sure milk mixture soaks all the way through. Cover jar tightly and refrigerate until oats are moist, 4 hours to overnight.
Whisk eggs, salt and milk together in a mixing bowl. While whisking, add the flour 1/4 cup at a time, making sure it is well combined before adding the next. Stir in 1/4 cup melted butter. In a separate bowl, mix 6 tablespoons softened butter, honey and orange zest together. Whip until creamy and smooth. Heat a 10-inch crepe pan over medium heat. When hot, add 1/2 teaspoon butter to the pan and spread around with a brush to cover the whole pan. If your pan is non-stick, you will only need to do this once. If your pan is not non-stick you may need to repeat this more often. Whisk the batter well, add 1/3 cup of batter to the heated pan; swirl it around to cover the entire surface of the pan. Cook until the edges brown and the crepe moves freely, about 2 minutes. Flip the crepe over and cook until evenly cooked. Remove from the pan and continue with the rest of the batter. Place a crepe on a warm plate. Spread 1 1/2 tablespoons filling evenly over one half of the crepe. Fold the crepe twice making a triangle. Do the same with the rest of the crepes. Top with remaining honey butter and serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Combine eggs, egg whites, and Greek yogurt in a bowl; beat by hand until thick and fluffy. Spray cooking spray inside of canning jars. Layer sausage, bell pepper, and spinach into the 2 jars. Pour egg mixture evenly into each jar; fill to 3/4 full to allow room to rise. Place jars onto a small baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are firm, 25 to 30 minutes. Remove from oven; cool for 5 to 10 minutes. Season with garlic powder, salt, and pepper.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch round cake pan with cooking spray. Cook and stir bacon in a large skillet over medium heat until some of the fat is released, about 2 minutes. Add onion; cook and stir until onion turns golden and bacon is crispy, 3 to 5 minutes. Stir in spinach and cook until wilted, about 2 minutes. Whisk milk and eggs together in a bowl. Soak croissant cubes in the milk mixture, 1 to 2 minutes. Stir in bacon mixture and drippings from the skillet. Fold in Monterey Jack cheese. Pour mixture into the prepared pan. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, about 30 minutes. Let stand for 10 minutes before slicing.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray muffin cups with cooking spray. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir spinach until wilted. Remove from heat and cool spinach. Squeeze spinach to remove excess moisture. Whisk egg whites and egg yolks together in a large bowl; add Parmesan cheese, Mexican cheese blend, garlic powder, sea salt, and spinach and mix well. Pour egg mixture into the muffin cups almost to the top. Place the muffin tin on a rimmed baking sheet and pour water halfway up the sides of the muffin tin to create a water bath. Bake in the preheated oven until muffins are set in the middle, 20 to 25 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Spray 12 muffin cups with cooking spray or line with paper liners. Combine eggs, spinach, red bell pepper, ham, egg whites, feta cheese, water, salt, and pepper in a large bowl. Ladle egg mixture into the prepared muffin cups. Bake in the preheated oven until set in the middle, 20 to 25 minutes.
Place oats in a blender and blend until a fine powder forms; add coconut milk beverage, banana, powdered peanut butter, and agave nectar. Blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F. Toast buns until golden brown. Cook sausage patties in a skillet over medium heat until brown. While preparing sausage, whisk the eggs together in a bowl and season with salt and pepper. In a clean saute pan add 1 tablespoon of olive oil and scramble the eggs till cooked throughout. Combine Sriracha sauce and mayonnaise and spread on each side of the buns. Place a sausage patty onto the four bottom buns. For each sandwich, top sausage with eggs, cheese and arugula. Serve while warm.
Thaw puff pastry sheet at room temperature until workable but still cold, about 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Heat a large skillet over medium high heat. Add corned beef hash. Cook and stir, breaking down larger pieces, until fat is rendered and hash is beginning to crisp up, about 15 minutes. and spread out. Transfer to a paper towel lined plate. Unroll puff pastry onto a 2nd sheet of parchment paper lightly dusted with flour. Roll out to a (11x11-inch) square.  Cut into 4 square (5 1/2 x 5 1/2-inch) pieces. Place squares on prepared baking sheet making sure they do not touch. Prick the center of each square several times with a fork. Bake in preheated oven 10 minutes. Pastry will have puffed in the middle. Gently press down the center of each pastry leaving a small puffed border around the edges. Divide corned beef among the pastry squares leaving a 1/2-inch border. Top with 1/4 cup of Swiss cheese.  Arrange toppings to create a slight well in the center for the eggs. Carefully crack an egg into the center of each square. Sprinkle with salt and pepper. Bake until eggs are cooked to your preference, about 12 to 15 minutes. Serve topped with chopped green onions and a drizzle of sriracha sauce.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Place a cast iron skillet in the preheated oven for 15 minutes. Whisk 3 eggs together in a bowl until well blended and frothy. Add milk and 2 tablespoons melted butter; mix well. Stir in flour, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and 1/2 teaspoon pepper and blend until batter is smooth. Place 1 tablespoon butter in the hot skillet and swirl until bottom is evenly coated and butter is melted. Pour batter into the skillet and place immediately in the oven. Bake in the preheated oven until edges are brown and pancake is inflated, 15 to 20 minutes. Heat vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat; crack 4 eggs into skillet. Cook until desired doneness is reached, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Mix ricotta cheese, salt, and pepper, together in a bowl. Cut pancake into 4 pieces and top each with a fried egg, ham, ricotta cheese, and Parmesan shavings.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a baking dish with cooking spray. Combine applesauce and oatmeal in a bowl; mix until evenly moistened. Spread mixture into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until no longer sticky, about 10 minutes. Flip applesauce oatmeal onto a work surface. Cut into bite-size squares and allow to cool.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch dish with cooking spray. Cook sausage in a large skillet, stirring occasionally, until no longer pink, 6 to 8 minutes. Drain fat and transfer to a bowl. Cook and stir hash browns to the same skillet until lightly browned, about 8 minutes. Place hash browns in the baking dish; top with sausage, shredded Cheddar cheese, and green chile peppers. Whisk eggs, milk, salt, pepper, onion powder, and garlic powder in a bowl. Pour over hash brown mixture. Bake uncovered in the preheated oven until bubbly and the top is golden brown, 35 to 40 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 6-cup muffin tin with cooking spray. Press circles into the bread slices using a small juice glass. Place 1 circle into each muffin cup. Heat a skillet over medium heat; cook bacon until almost crisp, 3 to 5 minutes. Beat eggs with onion, garlic powder, salt, and pepper in a bowl. Line each muffin cup with a slice of bacon. Fill each cup with egg mixture and top off with Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set, 20 to 25 minutes. Allow to cool slightly before serving.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place pie crust in a 9-inch glass pie plate. Cook ham in a skillet over medium heat until it no longer looks moist, about 3 minutes. Remove from heat and cool to room temperature. Combine Cheddar cheese, milk, eggs, bell pepper, onion, garlic, black pepper, sugar, and salt in a bowl. Stir in ham. Pour into the prepared pie crust. Bake in the preheated oven until crust is golden, top is starting to color, and filling is set, about 1 hour.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Whisk eggs with sugar and vanilla until fluffy. Add in Shamrock Farms Premium Sour Cream and whisk briefly. Add in flour, baking powder, and baking soda and whisk briefly. Pour in milk slowly, whisking until incorporated. Batter may be lumpy. Add up to 1/4 cup milk if it is too thick. It should be a thick batter, not watery or soupy, but should definitely be sticky and pourable. Pour 1/8 of the batter into a waffle iron and cook to desired darkness. Repeat with remaining batter. Once the steam dissipates, the waffles are cooked.
Add oats to a jar or other container. Pour in milk. Layer with yogurt. In small bowl, stir together pumpkin, maple syrup, and cinnamon; layer over yogurt. Top with pumpkin seeds or walnuts. Refrigerate overnight and enjoy in the morning.
Puree all ingredients in a blender until smooth.
Preheat the oven to 250 degrees F (120 degrees C). Combine brown sugar, maple syrup, vegetable oil, vanilla extract, salt, cayenne pepper, and cocoa powder in a bowl. Whisk thoroughly. Add oats and almonds. Toss and smear the mixture together using a spatula until well coated. Spread mixture evenly over a silicone-lined baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven for 30 minutes. Toss granola with a fork, breaking up any clumps to get a finer texture. Continue baking until desired texture is reached, 30 to 60 minutes more. Sprinkle some granola onto a plate; if it clinks, it is ready. Turn off the oven and leave granola inside the oven to dry and cool to room temperature.
Bring water to a boil. Add oats and cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Remove from heat and stir in brown sugar and maple syrup. Let sit until desired thickness is reached, 2 to 3 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Brush butter on the bottom and up the sides of two 5 1/2-ounce ramekins. Scoop in some sugar; rotate ramekins to coat while pouring most of the sugar back into its container. Place ramekins on a shallow baking pan. Separate eggs between 2 bowls. Add sugar, flour, 1/4 teaspoon salt, vanilla extract, lemon zest, cream cheese, and Cheddar cheese to the yolks. Mix the souffle base with a spatula until sugar and flour disappear. Sprinkle a pinch of salt over the room-temperature egg whites. Beat with a whisk until soft peaks form; peaks should hold their shape but not be stiff or dry. Stir and fold 1/2 of the egg whites into the souffle base until combined. Gently fold the rest of the egg whites into the batter. Fill ramekins up to the lip with the batter. Bake in the preheated oven until puffed and browned, about 12 minutes. Serve immediately.
Place hard bread into a pot. Cover bread with several inches of cool water, place a lid on the pot, and soak 8 hours to overnight. Rinse salt cod under running cool water; place into a pot. Cover fish with several inches of cold water, place a lid on the pot, and soak in the refrigerator 8 hours to overnight. Add salt to soaked bread and bring just to a simmer over medium-low heat and simmer for 2 minutes. Drain immediately; cover to keep warm. Drain fish and cover with fresh water; bring to a boil. Cook until fish is opaque and flakes easily with a fork, about 20 minutes. Drain fish; remove any bones. Stir fish into prepared hard bread. Cook and stir fatback in a frying pan over medium heat until golden brown, about 10 minutes. Pour fatback and drippings over fish and bread mixture. Stir gently just to combine; serve immediately.
Blend kiwi, banana, orange juice, pineapple, coconut water, yogurt, and agave nectar in a blender until smooth.
Process banana, lemon, mango, orange, apples, and ginger through juicer.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with waxed paper. Combine flour, brown sugar, salt, baking soda, and cinnamon in a large bowl. Stir in buttermilk and vanilla extract; mix well. Pour mixture into prepared baking sheet and spread evenly with a spatula. Bake in the preheated oven until browned and firm, 20 to 25 minutes. Cool patty in the baking sheet for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack. Preheat oven to 275 degrees F (135 degrees C). Break cooked patty into chunks and put through a meat grinder, using a coarse blade. Divide crumbs over two baking sheets. Bake in the oven until dry, stirring every 10 minutes, about 30 minutes. Allow crumbs to cool completely and store in an airtight container.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Beat eggs, milk, sugar, vanilla extract, and cinnamon in a bowl; dip toast into egg mixture and press into crushed corn flakes until coated. Arrange coated toast in a single layer in a baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned and crispy, 6 to 8 minutes per side.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 9x9-inch baking dishes. Heat butter in a skillet over low heat; cook and stir zucchini, onion, garlic, Italian seasoning, salt, and black pepper in the melted butter until zucchini and onion are tender, about 10 minutes. Drain any excess liquid from zucchini. Remove skillet from heat and cool, 15 to 20 minutes. Whisk half-and-half and eggs together in a bowl; stir in zucchini mixture, mozzarella cheese, Havarti cheese, and nutmeg. Season with salt and pepper. Unroll crescent roll dough and tear sheet in half. Press each half into the prepared baking dishes, forming a crust. Pour egg mixture evenly into each crust. Bake in the preheated oven until crust is golden and quiche is set in the middle, about 45 minutes.
Blend grapes, peaches, cabbage, carrot, ice cubes, and water in a high-powered blender (such as a Vitamix(R)) until desired consistency is reached.
Heat olive oil in a nonstick skillet over medium heat; cook and stir shallot and garlic in the hot oil until softened, about 5 minutes. Add zucchini; cook, stirring occasionally, until tender, about 5 minutes. Whisk egg whites, salt, and thyme together in a small bowl; mix into zucchini mixture. Cook, undisturbed, over low heat until frittata is set, about 2 minutes. Flip frittata and cook for 1 more minute. Season with salt and pepper.
Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Whisk eggs, yogurt, soy flour, sugar substitute, olive oil, flaxseed, vanilla, baking powder, salt, and cinnamon together in a bowl until smooth. Ladle batter onto griddle by 1/4 cupful; spread lightly with the back of the ladle. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip carefully and cook until browned on the other side, another 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Cook potatoes in the microwave until tender, 4 to 5 minutes. Cut into 1-inch cubes. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on paper towels; crumble. Arrange half the potatoes in the prepared baking dish; top with half the bacon, sour cream, mozzarella cheese, Cheddar cheese, salt, and black pepper. Repeat layering with remaining ingredients. Bake in the preheated oven until casserole is bubbling and cheese is melted, 20 to 25 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Coat a 10-inch pie dish with cooking spray. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat; cook salmon in the hot butter until fish flakes with a fork, about 5 minutes per side. Separate fillets into pieces; stir asparagus, onion, and garlic into skillet with salmon. Cook and stir until liquid clinging to asparagus pieces has evaporated, about 15 minutes. Mix pepper, nutmeg, and 1/2 cup Asiago cheese into salmon mixture. Transfer filling into prepared pie dish. Whisk eggs, half-and-half, and salt in a bowl; pour egg mixture over filling in pie dish. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes; sprinkle quiche with 1/2 cup Asiago cheese and Cheddar cheese. Continue baking until quiche is set, a knife inserted into the middle comes out clean, and cheese topping is melted, 35 to 40 minutes.
Blend ice, orange, limes, lemon, kiwi, and honey together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Prepare 12 muffin cups with cooking spray. Beat eggs in a large bowl. Stir cheese and crumbled burger into the eggs. Ladle into muffin cups to about 3/4-full. Bake in preheated oven until the egg is cooked in the center, 25 to 30 minutes.
Blend coconut water, pineapple, celery, cucumber, parsley, lemon, and ginger together in a blender until smooth.
Combine 1-1/2 cups flour, undissolved yeast, sugar, salt and Italian herb seasoning in large mixer bowl. Add water and oil; beat 2 minutes on medium speed. Gradually add remaining 1-1/4 cups flour to make a stiff yet sticky dough. Stir in sausage and cheese. Cover bowl and let rest 10 minutes. Portion dough into 12 (2-1/2 inch) generously greased muffin cups OR 36 mini muffin cups using a scoop or two spoons (do not use paper liners). Cover and let rise 35 to 45 minutes. Dough will rise, but not double in size. Bake in preheated 375 degrees F oven for 20 to 25 minutes (17 to 20 minutes for minis) until well browned. Let cool on wire rack for 2 minutes. Run a knife around each roll to remove from pan. Serve warm with pizza sauce for dipping, if desired. Refrigerate any leftovers.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 8x4-inch loaf pans. Beat white sugar, brown sugar, butter, and applesauce together in a bowl using an electric mixer until light and fluffy. Beat egg and egg whites into sugar mixture; stir in bananas, vanilla extract, and cinnamon. Mix flour, alternating with buttermilk, into sugar mixture until batter is well mixed; fold in pineapple and cherries. Pour batter into the prepared pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 45 to 55 minutes. Cool in the pans for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Blend milk, ice cubes, strawberries, cocoa powder, and vanilla extract together in a blender until smooth.
Blend pineapple juice, spinach, pear, apple, avocado, and broccoli florets together in a blender until smooth.
Beat eggs, Cheddar cheese, and milk together with a fork in a large bowl. Place sausages in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, 7 to 10 minutes. Transfer sausage to a work surface and cut into 1/2-inch pieces. Heat olive oil in a large, deep skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir onion and garlic in hot oil until onion is slightly translucent, 3 to 4 minutes. Gradually add spinach to onion mixture; cook and stir until wilted, 1 to 2 minutes. Add sausage pieces and cook until heated through, about 1 minute more. Slowly pour egg mixture into sausage mixture; cook and stir until eggs are set, 2 to 5 minutes. Stir rice, cayenne pepper, salt, and black pepper into eggs.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Line a pie plate with prepared pie pastry. Spray a large skillet with cooking spray and heat over medium heat. Cook and stir onion and garlic in hot skillet until onion is tender, 4 to 6 minutes. Stir mushrooms into onion mixture; cook and stir until mushrooms reduce in size and soften, 5 to 10 minutes. Add spinach to vegetable mixture; cook and stir until spinach wilts, 2 to 4 minutes. Remove from heat. Beat milk, eggs, Cajun seasoning, and salt together in a bowl. Spread vegetable mixture out into prepared pie plate; sprinkle Mexican cheese blend over vegetable mixture. Pour egg mixture over cheese and sprinkle feta cheese over the top. Bake in the preheated oven until quiche is set, 30 to 40 minutes.
Sift and stir flour, sugar, baking powder, and nutmeg together in a bowl. Whisk eggnog, milk, egg, and oil together in a separate bowl. Pour eggnog mixture into flour mixture and stir until batter is moistened and slightly lumpy. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat, about 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Beat eggs in large bowl. Add sour cream, muffin mix, corn, bacon and ground red pepper. Stir just until blended. Heat 1-inch of oil in deep fat fryer or skillet to 350 degrees F. or until batter sizzles when dropped into oil. Gently drop batter by tablespoonfuls into hot oil. Cook 1 to 2 minutes or until bottom is golden brown. Turn and cook 1 to 2 minutes longer, or until golden brown. Remove to drain on paper towels.
Blend coconut, almonds, flax seeds, and chia seeds together in a blender or food processor until slightly smooth. Add banana, coconut milk beverage, pineapple, protein powder, and agave nectar; blend until smooth.
Pour water into a blender. Add tomato, carrot, kale, radishes, lemon, spirulina powder; top with ice cubes. Blend vegetable mixture until smooth.
Beat eggs, coconut flour, coconut milk, honey, vanilla extract, nutmeg, and cinnamon together in a bowl until batter is smooth; let stand for 5 to 10 minutes. Grease a crepe pan with olive oil and place pan over low heat, wiping olive oil from pan with a paper towel. Pour about 1/4 cup batter into the pan and immediately tilt pan around until the batter evenly coats the bottom in a thin layer. Cook until the top of the crepe is no longer wet and the bottom has turned light brown, about 30 seconds. Run a spatula around the edge of the pan to loosen; flip crepe and cook until the other side has turned light brown. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place the bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on paper towels and pour bacon drippings into a glass bowl. Crumble bacon. Beat eggs and banana in a bowl with an electric mixer until foamy and smooth. Beat 1 1/2 tablespoons bacon drippings, crumbled bacon pieces, and vanilla extract into egg mixture. Whisk coconut flour, baking soda, baking powder, and salt into egg mixture until batter is just combined. Let batter rest for 2 minutes. Heat a griddle over medium-high heat and lightly grease with bacon drippings. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend ice cubes, orange juice, banana, and matcha powder together in a blender until smooth.
Blend yogurt and baby spinach together in a blender until spinach is finely chopped. Add blueberries, pineapple, raspberries, and water; blend until smooth. Add crushed ice and blend again until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Prepare a 2-quart shallow baking dish with cooking spray. Stir eggs and cream of mushroom soup together in a large bowl until smooth. Stir Cheddar cheese, roast beef, and black pepper into the egg mixture. Bake in preheated oven until set in the the center and golden brown on top, 45 to 50 minutes.
Blend spinach, beet, yogurt, raspberries, blueberries, ice cubes, and cucumber together in a blender until smooth.
Whisk egg substitute, egg, green onions, pepperoni slices, and garlic powder together in a bowl. Heat butter in a non-stick skillet over low heat; add egg mixture, cover skillet, and cook until eggs are set, 10 to 15 minutes. Sprinkle Romano cheese over eggs and season with salt and pepper.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F. Arrange bacon in a Reynolds(R) Bakeware Bacon Pan. Bake for 8 minutes, until almost crisp. Drizzle the bacon with 1 tablespoon maple syrup and bake 4 to 6 minutes more or until glazed. Cook longer for crispier bacon. Cool and chop. Stir together the cornmeal, flour, baking powder, and salt in a medium bowl. In a small bowl, whisk together milk, eggs, butter and remaining 4 tablespoons maple syrup. Add the milk mixture all at once to the cornmeal mixture. Add the chopped bacon. Stir just until moistened. Pour the batter into an 8x8-inch Reynolds(R) Bakeware Pan. Bake 20 to 25 minutes or until edges are golden brown. Let cool slightly before serving. Drizzle with additional maple syrup, if desired.
Cook the chicken strips according to package directions. Dice the cooked chicken strips and place them in a bowl and toss with the hot pepper sauce. Stir together the mashed potatoes, eggs, and ranch dressing mix in a large bowl. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat. In batches, drop 1/2 cup of the potato mixture into the skillet. Press to flatten. Sprinkle a heaping tablespoon of the coated chicken strips on the flattened pancake. Cook for about 4 minutes on each side, until the pancakes are golden brown. Garnish with shredded cheese and serve.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch pie plate. Place a large skillet over medium heat, and cook and stir the turkey sausage, onion, green bell pepper, mushrooms, and garlic until the turkey is no longer pink, about 8 minutes. Spread the turkey mixture into the prepared pie plate. Beat the eggs in a bowl with the milk, and stir in the biscuit mix. Pour the mixture over the turkey mixture in the pie dish. Sprinkle with Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until the cheese topping is browned and the pie filling is thickened and bubbling, about 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Spray a 9x5-inch loaf pan with cooking spray. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat and stir in the sausage and brown sugar. Cook and stir until the meat is crumbly, evenly browned, and no longer pink. Drain and discard any excess grease. Transfer sausage to a bowl; wipe the skillet clean. Melt the butter in the clean skillet over low heat. In a bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, salt, and black pepper. Pour the eggs into the skillet. Allow the eggs to cook undisturbed until they begin to set, then gently stir the eggs until the curds are separate and set but not dry, 5 to 7 minutes. Roll out the crescent roll dough, and line the bottom and sides of the prepared pan with 3/4 of the dough. Layer the sausage, scrambled eggs, and Colby-Monterey Jack cheese into the pan, then top with the remaining 1/4 of dough. Pinch the corners and sides of the dough together. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, 25 to 30 minutes.
Place the apple, rice cereal, cinnamon, and coconut oil into a microwave-safe bowl. Cook in a microwave oven until the coconut oil has melted, 30 to 45 seconds. Stir to combine. Serve topped with berries and walnuts, if desired.
Combine buckwheat groats with about 1 1/3 cup water in a bowl; allow to soak, draining and rinsing once or twice during soaking, 4 hours to overnight. Rinse and drain groats one final time. Transfer drained groats to a blender with egg, brown sugar, cinnamon, salt, and 1/2 cup water; blend into a smooth batter. Blend more water into the mixture as needed to reach a smooth, spreadable texture. Lightly grease a skillet and place over medium heat. Pour about 1/3 cup batter into the skillet; lift and tilt the skillet to swirl the batter evenly over the skillet; return to heat. Cook for about 2 minutes. Gently flip the crepe and cook the other side until the crepe is firm in the middle, about 2 minutes more; flip again and cook about 12 seconds. Plate and serve immediately.
Pour coffee into a large mug; stir in the molasses and half-and-half cream until smooth.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Combine baking mix, tarragon, dry mustard, and black pepper in a bowl. Whisk eggs and milk together in a separate bowl; pour the egg mixture into the baking mix and seasonings, and whisk until smooth. Pour half the batter into the bottom of the prepared baking dish. Arrange half the asparagus spears over the batter. Top asparagus spears with ham and onion; sprinkle on 1/2 cup of Parmesan cheese. Pour the remaining batter over the Parmesan cheese, and arrange the remaining asparagus spears on top. Sprinkle casserole with remaining 1/2 cup Parmesan cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until the casserole is golden brown and a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 35 to 40 minutes.
Sift flour, sugar, and salt together in a mixing bowl. Pour the milk slowly into the dry mixture while stirring. Add the egg yolks one at a time, beating until well blended before adding the next egg yolk. Place the egg whites in a separate bowl; beat until egg whites form stiff peaks. Gently stir 1/3 of the egg whites into the batter. Fold in the remaining egg whites. Melt 1 tablespoon butter in an 8 inch skillet over moderate heat. Pour in half the batter and cook about 4 minutes or until browned on the bottom. Loosen edges and slide pancake onto a plate using spatula. Invert the pancake back into the skillet and cook until both sides are brown, about 2 minutes. Remove to a warm platter and keep warm. Make the second pancake the same way. Dust with confectioners' sugar and serve.
Combine flour, oats, brown sugar, cinnamon, baking soda, and salt in a large bowl. Mix milk and lemon juice in another bowl; stir in banana. Stir banana mixture into flour mixture; fold in rhubarb. Heat a griddle or large skillet over medium heat. Drop 1/4 cupfuls of batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 2 minutes. Flip, and cook until browned on the other side, about 2 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Whisk spelt flour, oat flour, baking powder, flaxseed meal, and salt together in a large mixing bowl. Stir soy milk, applesauce, agave nectar, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Form a well in the center of the flour mixture and pour soy milk mixture into the well. Stir until the ingredients are just moistened; set aside for 15 minutes. Lightly oil and heat a griddle to medium heat. Spoon batter onto hot griddle, sprinkle blueberries onto wet batter, and cook until bubbles form, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and continue cooking until golden brown on both sides, about 3 minutes more.
Preheat and grease a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Combine spelt flour, flax seed meal, baking powder, cinnamon, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl. Stir coconut milk, coconut oil, eggs, vinegar, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Add coconut milk mixture to flour mixture; stir to combine. Let batter thicken for 1 to 2 minutes. Pour about 1 cup batter into waffle iron. Cook until golden and crisp, about 6 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Butter bottom and sides of a shallow roasting dish. Layer bread, Cheddar cheese, and ham in prepared roasting dish. Beat milk, eggs, thyme, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl. Pour egg mixture over bread mixture; cover and refrigerate 8 hours or overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake uncovered egg mixture in the preheated oven until center is set, about 1 hour. Allow to sit and cool for 15 minutes before serving.
Lightly whisk the eggs with the milk in a bowl to break the yolks and integrate the milk; season with 4 pinches black pepper and 2 pinches garlic salt. Heat olive oil in a non-stick skillet over medium heat; cook and stir mushrooms and onion in hot oil until the onion softens, about 5 minutes. Spread the mushrooms and onion into the bottom of the skillet so it forms an even layer. Sprinkle spinach evenly across the top of the mushroom and onion layer. Pour egg mixture over the vegetables. Cook until the top of the egg is set, 3 to 5 minutes. Sprinkle Stilton cheese and mozzarella cheese over the cooked egg; cook until the mozzarella begins to melt, fold the omelet in half around the filling to make a half-moon.
Combine tomato, green bell pepper, onion, and tarragon in a large bowl. Whisk eggs, milk, salt, and black pepper in another bowl. Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir egg mixture in hot butter until nearly set, about 2 minutes. Stir vegetable mixture into eggs; continue to cook and stir until eggs are set and vegetables begin to soften, about 3 minutes more.
In large bowl stir together Simply Potatoes, Better'n Eggs, flour, green onion, pepper, salt, and baking powder. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a 12-inch nonstick skillet over medium heat. Cook 4 latkes at a time: spread 1/4 cup potato mixture for each latke into 3 1/2-inch circles in skillet. Cook 4 to 5 minutes, turning once. Repeat with remaining potato mixture and add oil to skillet as needed. Season with salt and pepper if desired.
Pour applesauce, maple syrup, brown sugar, cinnamon, salt, vanilla and maple extracts, hemp hearts, and chia seeds into a slow cooker. Stir until well combined; add oats and pecans and stir again. Cook the granola in the slow cooker on high for 3 hours, venting the lid slightly. If you smell the granola cooking, it's time to stir. Keep an eye on it or it will burn if not stirred occasionally. Pour the finished granola onto a baking sheet lined with parchment paper and allow to cool completely. Store in an airtight container and enjoy!
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Mix all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, flax seed, baking powder, baking soda, salt, cinnamon, cloves, and nutmeg in a bowl. Beat butter, brown sugar, and sucralose sweetener in another bowl until light and fluffy. Beat  eggs, vanilla extract, and lemon juice into butter mixture until well combined. Stir flour mixture into butter mixture until smooth. Add yogurt, bananas, 1/2 cup walnuts, and 1/2 cup chocolate chips, stirring until batter is just blended. Pour batter into prepared loaf pan. Sprinkle remaining 1 tablespoon walnuts and 1 tablespoon chocolate chips on top of batter. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 70 minutes. Cool in the pan for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Blend grapes, kale, and ice together in a blender until smooth.
In a medium-sized bowl, beat together eggs, milk, and parsley; set aside. Slice the mozzarella into 12 rounds. Make 6 sandwiches with the bread and mozzarella, dip each sandwich in egg mixture. In a large skillet, lightly saute garlic in oil, then remove and discard garlic. Fry dipped sandwiches in the oil. When the sandwiches are browned, cut them into quarters on the diagonal and serve warm.
Place all ingredients except raisins in your bread machine's baking pan in the order recommended by the manufacturer. Use the basic or white cycle. You may need to add an extra tablespoon of water during kneading If your machine has a Fruit setting, add the raisins at the signal, or about 5 minutes before the kneading cycle has finished.
Heat 2 Tbs. oil over low heat in a 12-inch non-stick skillet (so potatoes don't stick). While skillet heats, prepare onion and tuna as directed above. A few minutes before cooking, increase heat to medium-high. When oil starts to send up wisps of smoke, add onion and tuna; cook, stirring often, until golden brown. Meanwhile, dice potatoes and toss with remaining oil. Transfer tuna mixture to a bowl and reserve. Add potatoes to empty skillet; cook, stirring only occasionally so they form a golden-brown crust, about 10 minutes. As potatoes cook, mix ketchup, mustard, fresh dill and 2 Tbs. of water. (Recipe can be prepared to this point up to 2 hours ahead. Spread hot potatoes on a large lipped cookie sheet; cover when cool. Return skillet to medium-high; add potatoes and re-crisp.) Return reserved tuna mixture to skillet; stir in ketchup mixture, then season with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring frequently, until hash has nicely browned, about 5 minutes longer.
Heat 2 tablespoons oil over low heat in a 12-inch non-stick skillet (so potatoes don't stick). While skillet heats, prepare onion and crab as directed above. A few minutes before cooking, increase heat to medium-high. When oil starts to send up wisps of smoke, add onion and crab; cook, stirring often, until golden brown, 4 to 6 minutes. Meanwhile, dice potatoes and toss with remaining oil. Transfer crab mixture to a bowl and reserve. Add potatoes to empty skillet; cook, stirring only occasionally so they form a golden-brown crust, about 10 minutes. As potatoes cook, mix ketchup, mustard, Old Bay(tm) Seasoning, fresh basil and 2 tablespoons of water. (Recipe can be prepared to this point up to 2 hours ahead. Spread hot potatoes on a large lipped cookie sheet; cover when cool. Return skillet to medium-high; add potatoes and re-crisp.) Return reserved crab mixture to skillet; stir in ketchup mixture, then season with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring frequently, until hash has nicely browned, about 5 minutes longer.
In a pitcher, combine apricot nectar, orange juice, and lemon juice. Serve chilled.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 12 cup muffin pan. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Stir in the leek, green onion, and salt and pepper; cook until soft and tender.  Pour in the beef broth; whisk in the flour. Simmer until mixture becomes creamy and thick. Line each muffin cup with 1 slice of ham to form a cup. Spoon about 1 tablespoon of the leek mixture into the bottom of each ham cup. Top with a heaping tablespoon of cheese. Press the cheese down lightly with a spoon. Beat eggs and cream in a large bowl. Divide egg mixture evenly between the ham cups. Bake cups in the preheated oven until set and golden, about 12 to 15 minutes. Allow baked eggs to rest for at least 10 minutes in muffin cups. Remove by gently pulling on the crisped ham edge and lifting up. Serve immediately or refrigerate.
Pour milk into a steaming pitcher and heat to 145 degrees F to 165 degrees F (65 to 70 degrees C) using the steaming wand. Measure the white chocolate and chocolate syrup into a large coffee mug. Brew espresso, then add to mug. Pour the steamed milk into the mug, using a spoon to hold back the foam. Top with whipped cream.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Coat two non-stick baking sheets with cooking spray. Sift together the flour, sugar, baking soda, and salt. Gradually beat the flour mixture into the egg whites to form a batter. Evenly fold the fruit cocktail into the batter. Dollop the batter in 2 tablespoon portions onto the prepared baking pans, leaving at least 2 inches between pancakes. Bake in preheated oven until puffed and golden brown, 10 to 15 minutes.
Place orange juice, pineapple juice, and orange sherbet into a blender, and blend until smooth. Pour into two glasses, and garnish each with a pineapple ring.
Heat a large nonstick skillet over medium-low heat. In a medium bowl, whisk the eggs until well blended. When the pan is hot, pour the eggs in. Cook, stirring frequently, until the eggs are scrambled. Nice scrambled eggs should have a soft texture, not hard and leathery. Remove the eggs from the heat, and stir in the mayonnaise and chili sauce. Serve immediately.
In a large bowl, stir together the cornmeal and boiling water. Let soak for about 15 minutes. While still warm but not hot, stir in the flour, sugar, milk and yeast. Cover, and let rise overnight in the refrigerator. In the morning, mix in the eggs, baking powder and salt. If the batter seems too thin, add more cornmeal to thicken it up. If desired, set aside a cupful of batter for the next morning's batch of griddle cakes (see Cook's Note). Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Spoon pancakes onto the hot griddle, and cook until browned on each side. Serve at once with butter and syrup.
Brown sausage in a large skillet over medium-high heat; drain fat. Place croutons in a 9X13 inch baking dish. Sprinkle cheese over croutons; top with browned sausage. Beat eggs and 2 1/2 cups of milk in a mixing bowl, and pour over the casserole. Cover baking dish, and refrigerate overnight. The following morning, preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Combine the mushroom soup, ground mustard, and the remaining 1/2 cup milk; pour over the top of the casserole. Bake, uncovered, until browned and set, about 1 1/2 hours.
Bring the water to a boil in a saucepan over high heat. Reduce the heat to medium, and stir in the tea bags, peppercorn, cinnamon sticks, cardamom pods, and cloves. Let boil for 1 minute. Pour in the condensed milk, and bring back to a boil. Remove from the heat, strain into cups, and serve.
Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Season the fish with salt and place in the skillet. Fry on both sides until fish is browned and cooked through, about 5 minutes per side. Remove from the skillet and set aside. Fry the onions and garlic in the same skillet over medium heat until translucent. Add the peppercorns, allspice berries, bay leaves, and red chile pepper. Pour in the vinegar and water and bring to a boil. Stir in the brown sugar until dissolved. Season with curry powder, turmeric, cumin and coriander. Taste and adjust the sweetness if desired. Layer pieces of fish and the pickling mixture in a serving dish. Pour the liquid over until the top layer is covered. Allow to cool then cover and refrigerate for at least 24 hours before serving.
Juice the peaches, apple, and lime with a juice extractor.  Transfer the juice to a blender with the mint leaves.  Blend quickly to combine the juice and mint thoroughly.
Place mango, peaches, orange, nectarine, orange juice, and ice into a blender. Blend for 1 minute, or until smooth.
Preheat an oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Combine the oats, flour, walnuts, yeast, salt, milk powder, and coconut in a large mixing bowl; set aside. Stir the sugar, water, canola oil, and peanut butter together in a small saucepan over low heat until the sugar has dissolved and the mixture is hot and smooth. Pour the peanut butter over the oats and stir until evenly combined. Spread out onto 4 baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven for 45 minutes, stirring every 15 minutes. Turn the oven off and allow the granola to cool in the oven until dry, about 3 hours.
Place papaya, milk, sugar, condensed milk, yogurt, cream cheese, and ice in a blender. Blend until smooth. Serve immediately.
Place strawberry and lime sorbets, lime juice, strawberries, orange juice, and ice cubes in a blender and puree until smooth.
Heat 1 cup oil in a small saucepan over medium-high heat. Deep fry the eggs in the hot oil until they are golden brown, 5 to 7 minutes; set aside. Combine the chile peppers, garlic, shallots, tomatoes, and shrimp paste in a food processor; blend into a paste. Add in peanut oil. Process again until smooth. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Pour the chile pepper mixture into the skillet. Stir the vinegar, sugar, salt, and pepper into the mixture. Add the fried eggs to the mixture, turning to coat. Reduce heat to medium-low; simmer until fragrant, about 5 minutes.
Whisk together eggnog, coffee, and whiskey in a punch bowl until well blended. Whip the cream in a large mixing bowl until it forms soft peaks.  Lightly fold the whipped cream into the eggnog mixture. Float scoops of coffee ice cream in the eggnog.  Sprinkle with nutmeg to serve.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Butter a 1-1/2 quart baking dish. Melt butter in a saucepan over medium heat. Gradually whisk in flour and cook about 5 minutes (reduce heat if mixture begins to brown). Slowly whisk in the hot milk and heat until mixture reaches a low boil, stirring constantly. Remove from heat and allow to cool at least 5 minutes (otherwise eggs will cook when added to the mixture). Stir the beaten egg yolks into the cooled sauce. Blend in the mayonnaise. Add the crabmeat and season with salt, pepper, cayenne, and Old Bay(R) seasoning if using. Gently fold in the beaten egg whites. Pour into prepared baking dish. Dust with paprika. Bake until browned and puffy, about 20 minutes. Serve immediately.
Heat 2 Tbs. oil over low heat in a 12-inch non-stick skillet (so potatoes don't stick). While skillet heats, prepare onion and kielbasa sausage. A few minutes before cooking, increase heat to medium-high. When oil starts to send up wisps of smoke, add onion and kielbasa sausage; cook, stirring often, until golden brown, 7 to 8 minutes. Meanwhile, dice potatoes and carrots, and toss with remaining oil. Transfer onion and kielbasa mixture to a bowl and reserve. Add potato and carrot mixture to empty skillet; cook, stirring only occasionally so they form a golden-brown crust, about 10 minutes. As potatoes cook, mix ketchup, mustard, caraway seeds, parsley and 2 Tbs. of water. (Recipe can be prepared to this point up to 2 hours ahead. Spread hot potatoes on a large lipped cookie sheet; cover when cool. Return skillet to medium-high; add potatoes and re-crisp.) Return reserved kielbasa mixture to skillet; stir in ketchup mixture, then season with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring frequently, until hash has nicely browned, about 5 minutes longer.
The night before: Split each bread slice four fifths of the way through. Spread the two sides apart so that they look like butterfly wings. Use a fork hollow out a shallow pocket on the inside of each slice. Discard the crumbs; set bread aside In a medium bowl, mix together the mozzarella, cream cheese and ricotta cheese. Stir in the apricot jam. Spoon 2 tablespoons  of cheese mixture into each bread slice. Place slices in a 9x13 inch baking dish. Cover and chill 8 hours or overnight. The next morning: Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Pour apricot nectar into a small saucepan and simmer over medium heat. Stir in sugar and cornstarch; cook until thickened. Beat together eggs and milk. Dip bread slices into egg mixture and dredge in cornflakes crumbs. Melt 2 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over medium heat; cook bread 2 minutes on each side or until golden. Place in a lightly greased 9x13 inch baking dish. Bake at 400 degrees for 15 minutes. In a medium frying pan or skillet, heat 1/4 cup butter, 2 tablespoons sugar and ginger over medium heat. Add peaches and cook for 3 minutes. Arrange French toast slices on individual plates. Top each serving evenly with peach slices, sprinkle with powdered sugar. Serve with apricot syrup.
Cream shortening with sugar.  Mix in eggs.  Dissolve soda in milk, and add to the creamed mixture.  Stir in flour, cream of tartar, and salt.  Stir in nuts. Pour batter into a 3 pound coffee can, or several 1 pound soup cans; fill containers 1/2 to 3/4 full. Bake at 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 1 hour, or until a tester inserted in the center of loaf comes out clean.
In a large bowl, beat eggs with sugar until thick and pale.  Beat in flour and cream, alternately.  Fold in melted butter. Heat a skillet over high heat.  Ladle batter onto hot skillet, tilting to coat entire surface.  Cook 2 minutes, turning once when edges get crispy (the second side will take about 30 seconds).
Heat the spinach in a saucepan with 1/2 cup of water, until completely thawed. Strain the spinach, reserving half the amount of liquid. Crumble the matzo into a medium-size mixing bowl and pour the spinach and the remaining liquid over them. Mix thoroughly until the matzo are softened. Add the Parmesan, eggs, salt, nutmeg and pepper. Heat the margarine in a 12 inch skillet and add the spinach mixture. Cook on medium heat, uncovered for 5 minutes on each side. Sprinkle with grated Parmesan and serve immediately.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). In a large nonstick, oven-proof skillet over medium-high heat, heat the oil. Add the scallions, ginger, and garlic and saute for 1 to 2 minutes. Add the red pepper and saute for 3 minutes. In a medium-size mixing bowl, mix together the eggs and soy sauce. Add to the skillet. Cook over medium heat for 8 to 10 minutes until eggs are set on bottom. Place the bean sprouts and snow peas over the eggs. Sprinkle with sesame seeds. Place in the oven at 350 degrees  F (175 degrees C) and bake just until top is set, about 8 to 10 minutes. Watch carefully that eggs are just cooked and do not become tough. Set oven to broil. Broil the frittata for 30 seconds just to give it a nice browned color. Serve in wedges.
Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Spread bacon squares into a 9x13-inch baking dish. Cook bacon under preheated broiler until brown, 7 to 10 minutes. Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Beat eggs, sugar, and salt together in a bowl; add milk and flour alternately while mixing with a spoon to make a thin batter. Pour batter into the hot baking dish with the bacon. Bake in preheated oven until puffy and brown, 20 to 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir sausage, breaking meat into chunks, until crumbly and no longer pink, about 10 minutes. Transfer sausage to a paper towel-lined plate to drain. Mix cooked sausage, mozzarella cheese, Parmesan cheese, and egg together in a bowl. Rough dough into a 10x14-inch rectangle on a baking sheet. Spread sausage-cheese mixture onto dough, leaving a 1-inch border. Roll dough around filling, starting from the long edge, creating a long log. Form the log into a circle and pinch edges together to seal. Brush top of roll with egg yolk. Bake in the preheated oven until ring is dark golden brown, 1 hour. Cool for 15 minutes before slicing into pieces to serve.
Blend coconut milk, ice cream, bananas, and honey in a blender or food processor until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray the inside of a 9x13-inch casserole dish with cooking spray. Spread butter on one side of each bread slice; top each bread slice with 2 slices ham and 1 slice Swiss cheese. Arrange open-faced sandwiches in the prepared casserole dish, overlapping them to fit. Whisk milk, eggs, Worcestershire sauce, mustard powder, salt, and pepper together in a bowl; pour milk mixture over the open-faced sandwiches. Allow milk mixture to soak in for at least 15 minutes. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set and casserole is cooked through, about 20 minutes.
Melt 1 tbsp of the butter in a saucepan. Whisk in flour and salt. Gradually whisk in milk until smooth. Bring mixture to a simmer over medium heat, stirring constantly, until slightly thickened. Remove from heat. Add 1-1/4 cups of the cheese, stirring until melted. Set aside. Melt remaining 2 tbsp butter in a large frying pan. Add mushrooms and onion; saute until tender and liquid evaporates. Whisk eggs. Add eggs and bacon or ham to mushroom/onion mixture. Cook until eggs are just set but still a little wet. Stir cheese sauce into egg mixture. Spoon mixture into a greased 9-inch (23 cm) square baking pan or 2.5 L casserole. Sprinkle remaining 1/2 cup cheese over top. Cover and refrigerate overnight. The next morning, uncover and bake in a preheated 350 degrees F (180 degrees C) oven until heated through and cheese is melted, 20 to 25 minutes.
Beat eggs with salt, pepper and water. Heat butter in a pan over high heat until frothing. Pour in egg mix. Turn down heat slightly. Gently push cooked egg to the middle of pan with a wooden fork, allowing uncooked egg to run underneath. When omelette is set on top - and browned underneath, spread with Maille(R) Old Style mustard, sour cream and sprinkle with chopped ham. Flip omelette over and slide onto a serving plate. Best served with tomato salad, tossed in vinaigrette with basil leaves.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Arrange phyllo tart shells on a baking sheet. Fill each shell with about 1 teaspoon Swiss cheese and 1/2 teaspoon bacon. Lightly beat egg, half-and-half, basil, parsley, garlic powder, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl. Pour about 1 teaspoon egg mixture into each phyllo shell. Bake in the preheated oven until egg is set in the middle and lightly browned, 12 to 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Fit pie crust into a 9-inch deep-dish pie plate. Bake crust in preheated oven until just beginning to brown on the edge, about 10 minutes. Let the crust cool. Raise oven temperature to 400 degrees F (205 degrees C). Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Cook asparagus pieces and sun-dried tomatoes in hot butter, stirring often, until asparagus is tender and bright green, about 10 minutes; season mixture with salt and black pepper. Transfer vegetables to the prebaked pie crust. Pour eggs and cream into a blender; add nutmeg. Pulse several times to blend the egg mixture; pour over vegetables in the pie crust. Bake in the oven until egg mixture is set and quiche is lightly browned, about 40 minutes. Let quiche stand for 15 minutes before slicing. Serve topped with chili sauce.
Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Line 2 baking sheets with parchment paper. Combine oatmeal, sunflower seeds, pumpkin seeds, sesame seeds, flax seeds, wheat germ, chopped dried cherries, salt, and cinnamon in a large bowl. Mix applesauce, maple syrup, and vanilla in a separate bowl. Pour applesauce mixture over the oatmeal mixture; mix until evenly coated. Spread the mixture onto the prepared baking sheets; smooth into a single thin layer. Bake in preheated oven 20 minutes, stir gently to turn, and continue cooking until crisp and golden brown, another 15 to 20 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat butter in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion and ham in butter until onion is translucent, about 5 minutes. Stir in morel mushrooms and cook, stirring often, until the mushrooms release their liquid, about 2 minutes. Sprinkle in black pepper and remove from heat. Fit pie crust into a 9-inch pie dish and crimp the edges with a fork. Poke the bottom and sides of the pie crust several times with the fork. Bake crust in the preheated oven just until lightly browned, about 10 minutes. Whisk eggs, cream, and flour in a bowl until well blended; stir in Colby-Monterey Jack cheese. Spread ham and mushroom mixture into the pie crust and pour egg mixture over the filling. Bake quiche in the preheated oven until crust is browned and the filling is set and lightly browned, about 45 minutes. Serve hot or cold.
Place farro in a bowl and cover with several inches of cool water; let stand in refrigerator for 8 hours to overnight. Drain. Place farro in a saucepan and cover with water; stir in a pinch of salt and bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until tender, about 15 minutes. Drain. Mix milk, sugar, vanilla bean with seeds, and a pinch of salt together in a saucepan. Cook and stir over medium-low heat until sugar is dissolved and milk is warm, 5 to 7 minutes. Remove vanilla bean and add farro to milk mixture. Cook and stir until heated through, about 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Melt butter in large skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir onion in melted butter until soft, about 7 minutes; transfer to large bowl. Blend eggs, milk, Jarlsberg cheese, and Parmesan cheese in a food processor or blender; pour into bowl with the onion. Add chard, thyme, nutmeg, salt, and black pepper; mix. Pour egg mixture into prepared pie crust. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center of the quiche comes out clean, 40 to 45 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease 4 baking sheets. Beat butter and sugar with an electric mixer in a large bowl until smooth. Beat the first egg into the butter until completely blended. Add second egg with vanilla extract; continue beating. Continue beating while adding vegetable oil, honey, oats, whole wheat flour, ground flax seed, sesame seeds, poppy seeds, flax seeds, baking soda, and ground cinnamon, respectively. Fold raisins into the dough. Use a 1/4 cup measuring cup to create monster cookie size and drop onto prepared baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven until edges are just browning, about 20 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease the entire inside of a fluted tube pan. Cook and stir sausage and green bell pepper in a skillet over medium heat until sausage is browned and crumbly, about 10 minutes; drain excess grease. Cook and stir eggs into sausage mixture until cooked through and scrambled, about 5 minutes. Cut each biscuit in half. Flatten a piece of biscuit dough; fill with 1 to 2 tablespoons sausage-egg mixture. Roll the biscuit dough around the filling, creating a ball. Place pepperjack cheese into a shallow bowl. Roll the biscuit ball in the pepperjack cheese. Place in the prepared fluted tube pan. Repeat with remaining biscuits, sausage filling, and cheese. Sprinkle any remaining cheese around the filled biscuits. Bake in the preheated oven until the biscuits are browned and the cheese is melted, 45 to 60 minutes. Remove and let cool for 20 minutes. Run a knife between the pan and the cooked biscuits to release; invert onto a serving plate. To serve, pull the monkey bread apart with fingers.
Butter a large tube pan. Sprinkle butterscotch pudding mix and white sugar into tube pan. Arrange rolls around the pan. Sprinkle with pecans and brown sugar, then drizzle melted butter on top. Place pan in a cold oven and allow dough to rise overnight. Remove pan from oven. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in preheated oven until golden brown, 25 to 30 minutes. Invert pan onto a large plate to serve.
Blend soy milk, yogurt, green tea powder, and ice in a blender on high until ice is entirely crushed, about 1 minute.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Mix flour, 1 1/4 cup white sugar, brown sugar, baking soda, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt in a large bowl. Stir mashed banana, canola oil, pineapple, flaked coconut, 1/4 cup walnuts, 1/4 cup macadamia nuts, eggs, applesauce, vanilla extract, lemon extract, and coconut extract into flour mixture until blended. Pour batter into prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of the loaf comes out clean, 70 to 80 minutes. Cool bread in the pan for 10 minutes; remove and transfer to a wire rack to cool, 20 to 30 minutes. Mix butter, 1/4 cup white sugar, 1/4 cup walnuts, 1/4 cup macadamia nuts, and milk together in a bowl. Spread on top of bread once it has been transferred to the wire rack.
Fill a large pot with lightly salted water and bring to a rolling boil. Stir in the fresh linguine and return to a boil. Cook until the pasta floats to the top, 2 to 3 minutes; drain and set aside. Heat vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat, and cook bacon, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on paper towels; crumble and set aside. Cook and stir sausage in the same skillet, until brown and crumbly, 8 to 10 minutes. Drain excess grease. Return bacon to skillet and stir in garlic, 2 tablespoons flat-leaf parsley, green onions, garlic powder, oregano, seasoned salt, onion powder, salt, and black pepper; cook and stir just until garlic is fragrant, about 30 seconds. Stir cooked linguine into the bacon and sausage; toss lightly to combine. Stir eggs and 6 tablespoons Parmesan cheese into the pasta until eggs are set, about 2 minutes. Divide onto 2 serving plates and sprinkle each serving with 1 teaspoon parsley and 1 teaspoon Parmesan cheese.
Heat the vegetable oil in a large nonstick skillet over medium-low heat. Cook the scrapple until crispy and browned on both sides, 5 to 7 minutes per side. Drain the scrapple slices on a paper towel-lined plate. Place a scrapple slice onto a piece of toasted bread, spread with mustard, and top with another slice of bread to assemble.
Heat the olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Stir in the garlic, onion, and jalapeno; cook and stir until the onion has softened and turned translucent, about 5 minutes. Add the bell pepper and tomatoes. Cook the vegetables until the tomatoes have broken down and released their juices, about 10 minutes. Stir in the sweet paprika, hot paprika, salt, and pepper and let the mixture simmer for 3 minutes. Add the tomato paste and water and mix well. When the vegetables have a sauce-like consistency, add the saffron and parsley. Crack the eggs on top of the sauce (as though you're making sunnyside-up eggs); cover the pan and let the eggs cook for 10 to 15 minutes or until the yolks reach your desired consistency.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Stir the bananas and vinegar together in a bowl, and set aside. Cream the sugar and butter together in a large bowl until creamy and smooth, then beat in the eggs. Stir in the reserved banana mixture. In a separate bowl, stir the flour, baking soda, baking powder, and salt together until the mixture is free of lumps. Mix the flour mixture into the butter-sugar mixture until well blended, and stir in the chopped walnuts and chocolate chips. Spread the batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned and a toothpick inserted into the center of the loaf comes out clean, 50 to 60 minutes. Let cool in pan about 5 minutes, then turn out onto a wire rack.
Sift together the Kamut(R) flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt in a large bowl. Whisk together the mayonnaise, coconut milk, water, and vanilla in a separate bowl. Pour the wet ingredients into the dry mixture; stir to combine, but do not over-stir. The batter should be lumpy. Preheat a griddle or place a large skillet over medium heat; lightly grease the cooking surface. Measure batter onto the heated cooking surface in about 1/4 cup portions, leaving 1 to 2 inches between each pancake. Allow to cook until bubbles form on the top of the cake; flip and cook 1 minute more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place bacon into a skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon on a paper towel-lined plate, allow to cool, and crumble the bacon. Preheat the oven's broiler and set the oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source. Whisk eggs and milk in a bowl until smooth. Heat vegetable oil in an omelet pan or skillet over medium heat and pour in egg mixture. Swirl the pan to coat the bottom of the skillet evenly with the eggs. Cook until the omelet is barely set but the edges are not hard, 1 to 2 minutes. Gently flip the omelet over and cook the other side, about 1 more minute. Place omelet onto a broiler-safe baking sheet; top the omelet with crumbled bacon, diced tomato, deli turkey, and Monterey Jack cheese. Fold the omelet in half to enclose the fillings and place the omelet under the broiler until the cheese bubbles, about 2 minutes. Place omelet onto a serving platter and arrange the tomato slices on the omelet. Pour hollandaise sauce over the omelet and sprinkle with parsley flakes to serve.
Melt 1 teaspoon butter in small non-stick pan medium over high heat; add Canadian bacon slices and cook just to warm bacon. Remove from pan and set aside. In same pan, add 1 tablespoon butter and cook eggs as desired. Season with salt and pepper. Spread 1 teaspoon butter in center of each roll. Assemble sandwiches with Canadian bacon, egg and cheese slices.
In a bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt until thoroughly combined. In a large bowl, whisk the eggs until well beaten, then whisk in sour cream and vanilla extract. Whisk the flour mixture into the sour cream mixture, and mix in the milk and melted butter to form a thin but smooth batter. Butter a skillet, and heat over medium heat until the butter is fragrant; pour in enough batter to coat the skillet in a thin layer (pancakes should be very thin). Allow to cook until the bottom is lightly browned, then turn the thin pancake over to brown the other side.
Place the hot coffee, banana, condensed milk, chocolate syrup, and protein powder into a blender. Hold down the lid of the blender with a folded kitchen towel, and carefully start the blender, using a few quick pulses to get the coffee moving before leaving it on to puree until smooth. Divide ice cubes into 4 large glasses, and pour coffee mixture over the ice.
Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Cook the potatoes until just starting to turn tender, stirring occasionally, about 10 minutes. Stir in leek and garlic; cook until the white parts of the leek are translucent, about 5 more minutes. In a bowl, beat together eggs and milk until well combined. Stir the shrimp into the skillet with the potatoes and leek, then pour the egg mixture into the skillet. Reduce heat to medium-low, and cook gently, stirring the eggs frequently, until the curds of egg are almost dry and the shrimp are pink and opaque, about 3 minutes. Sprinkle with hot pepper sauce to serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a baking dish with coconut oil. Drain zucchini and onion in a colander until no longer wet, about 10 minutes. Beat eggs, almond flour, green onions, garlic, onion powder, basil, sea salt, and black pepper together in a large mixing bowl until smooth; stir zucchini and onion into the egg. Pour the egg mixture into the prepared baking dish. Bake in preheated oven until set in the center, 35 to 40 minutes.
Blend milk, strawberries, yogurt, chocolate-flavored malt drink mix, and vanilla extract together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Mix potatoes, sour cream, Cheddar cheese, cream of celery soup, onion, 1/4 cup butter, white pepper, and cayenne pepper together in a bowl; spread into a 9x13-inch baking dish. Sprinkle corn flakes and cheese-flavored crackers over potato mixture and drizzle remaining butter over the top. Bake in the preheated oven until bubbling and cooked through, about 1 hour.
Blend soy milk, pineapple, cantaloupe, tofu, lime juice, and coconut extract in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Place potatoes in a microwave-safe bowl; cook in the microwave, stirring occasionally, until tender but still hold shape, 2 to 3 minutes. Whisk eggs, Parmesan cheese, milk, and half of the rosemary together in a bowl until smooth; season with salt and pepper. Saute bacon in a large oven-proof skillet over medium-high heat until almost crisp, 4 to 5 minutes. Remove about 1/4 cup of the bacon and set aside; drain all but 2 tablespoons bacon drippings from the skillet. Saute potatoes in the bacon drippings and remaining bacon until bacon is crisp, 1 to 2 minutes. Remove skillet from heat. Gently stir tomato and egg mixture into the potatoes. Sprinkle reserved bacon and remaining rosemary over egg mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set and frittata is browned, about 40 minutes. Cut frittata into wedges.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Blend carrots, canola oil, onion, 1 teaspoon salt substitute, and pepper together in a blender until smooth. Whisk water and cornstarch together in a bowl until cornstarch is dissolved; add to carrot mixture and blend until smooth. Pour carrot mixture into a 1 1/2-quart casserole dish and press into a 'crust' shape. Bake in the preheated oven until crust is dry and firm, about 20 minutes. Whisk broccoli, eggs, pesto, and 1 teaspoon salt substitute together in a bowl until smooth; pour over the carrot crust. Bake in the preheated oven until set in the middle, 40 to 45 minutes. Cool quiche for 25 minutes and top with Parmesan cheese.
Preheat griddle to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray the griddle with cooking spray. Whisk eggs together in a bowl until smooth. Add half-and-half, vanilla extract, and cinnamon to eggs and whisk until frothy. Dunk croissants, 1 at a time, into egg mixture just until both sides are coated. Cook croissants on the hot griddle, split-side down, until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and continue cooking until second side is golden brown, about 1 minute. Repeat with remaining croissants. Sprinkle confectioners' sugar over croissants.
Blend almond milk, kiwi, spinach, pineapple, and ice in a blender until smooth.
Blend orange, carrots, grapes, ice cubes, water, and ginger in a blender until smooth.
Warm tortilla in a large skillet over medium heat. Melt coconut oil in a separate skillet over medium-high heat. Saute spinach and tomato in hot oil until spinach wilts, about 1 minute. Add eggs and scramble until almost set, about 2 minutes. Sprinkle feta cheese over eggs and continue cooking until cheese melts, about 1 minute more. Transfer scrambled egg mixture to warm tortilla in the large skillet; top with diced tomato. Roll tortilla and leave in skillet long enough for wrap to hold its shape, about 30 seconds.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Heat applesauce in a small saucepan over medium heat until hot but not boiling. Pour applesauce into blender. Add the eggs. Blend until combined; about 5 seconds. Add vanilla, sugar, salt and flour. Blend until evenly mixed. Add two tablespoons of melted butter. Blend another 30 seconds. Heat oven-proof skillet on medium heat. Pour a tablespoon of melted butter into skillet and swirl it around to coat the bottom and sides of the pan. Immediately pour the batter into the skillet; place in middle rack of oven. Bake until golden brown around the edges and the pancake is puffed, about 20 minutes. Brush the last tablespoon of melted butter evenly over pancake. Sift powdered sugar over top, if desired. Mix together 2 tablespoons flour, 1/4 cup sugar, and 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon in a small bowl. Cut in butter until mixture resembles coarse crumbs. Sprinkle over the Dutch Baby. Serve immediately.
Combine all ingredients into a blender. Blend until smooth. Enjoy!
Place apple, kale, coconut meat, cucumber, celery, and spinach in a blender; top with coconut water, almond milk, water, and lemon juice. Blend on high for 30 seconds to 1 minute.
Blend banana, milk, pumpkin, tofu, almonds, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a blender until smooth.
Heat oil in a griddle or large skillet over medium heat. Stir corn, cornbread mix, milk, and egg together in a bowl until batter is combined. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto preheated griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 1 1/2 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 1 1/2 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Beat avocado and cream cheese together in a bowl until smooth; spread onto tortillas. Heat oil in skillet over medium heat; cook and stir eggs in the hot oil until scrambled and set, about 5 minutes. Transfer eggs to tortillas; season with salt and pepper. Roll tortillas around eggs and place in the hot skillet until tortillas are crisp, about 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour two 9x5-inch loaf pans. Mix white sugar, pumpkin puree, vegetable oil, eggs, and water together in a large bowl until smooth. Whisk baking flour, baking mix, pumpkin pie spice, baking soda, and baking powder together in a separate bowl; stir into pumpkin mixture until batter is just blended. Pour batter into the prepared pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, about 50 minutes. Beat cream cheese, confectioners' sugar, and milk together in a bowl using an electric mixer until icing is smooth. Spread icing over pumpkin bread.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions and spray the inside with cooking spray. Mix oats, rice flour, cornmeal, and baking powder together in a bowl. Stir soy milk, eggs, and oil together in a separate bowl; add to oats mixture and stir until batter is just combined. Pour 1 cup batter into the preheated waffle iron and cook according to manufacturer's instructions until lightly browned, about 4 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place acorn squash, cut-side down, in a microwave-safe dish; add enough water to reach a 1-inch depth. Cook squash in microwave until tender, about 20 minutes; allow to cool until easily handled. Scoop meat out of squash and discard peel. Combine flour, baking powder, cinnamon, ginger, salt, and cloves in a bowl. Blend squash meat, brown sugar, milk, eggs, and vegetable oil in a food processor until smooth; mix into flour mixture until batter is smooth. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Spray the inside of the waffle iron with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 to 3/4 cup batter (depending on size of waffle iron) into waffle iron and cook according to manufacturer's instructions. Repeat with remaining batter.
Stir oats, almonds, and 1 teaspoon cinnamon, and salt together in a bowl. Mix 1/2 cup coconut oil into oat mixture until crumbly. Heat remaining 2 tablespoons coconut oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir apples in hot oil until crisp and tender, 4 to 6 minutes. Mix honey and 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon into apples. Pour oat mixture into skillet with apple mixture, lower heat to medium, cover, and cook, stirring occasionally, until oats are cooked and tender, 10 to 15 minutes.
Preheat waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Beat egg whites in a glass or metal bowl using an electric mixer on high until stiff peaks form. Lift your beater or whisk straight up: the egg whites will form sharp peaks. Whisk flour, cornmeal, chia seeds, baking powder, baking soda, white sugar, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk buttermilk, canola oil, and egg yolks together in a separate bowl; stir into flour mixture until batter is smooth. Gently fold egg whites into batter until just mixed. Pour about 1/4 cup batter into preheated waffle iron; cook according to manufacturer's instructions until golden brown, about 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place pumpkin, water, rice milk, and millet in a slow cooker and stir well. Cook on Low until creamy, 4 to 5 hours. Stir butter and salt into cereal before serving.
Blend strawberries, coconut milk, yogurt, flax seed, almond butter, honey, and vanilla in a blender until no traces of yogurt can be seen. Stop the blender and scrape down the sides with a rubber spatula. Continue blending until the mixture is completely smooth, about 1 more minute.
Spray a 9x12-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Beat 1 1/2 cups milk and eggs together in a large bowl using an electric mixer until frothy, about 2 minutes. Add 1 1/4 cups flour and 1/4 teaspoon salt to milk mixture; beat until incorporated, about 2 more minutes. Heat a non-stick skillet over medium heat. Pour 1/4 cup batter into the skillet and immediately rotate the skillet until the batter evenly coats the bottom in a thin layer. Cook until the top of the crepe is no longer wet and the bottom has turned light brown, about 4 minutes. Run a spatula around the edge of the skillet to loosen; flip crepe and cook until the other side has turned light brown, about 2 more minutes. Whisk water, 1/4 cup flour, 1/4 teaspoon salt together in a bowl. Place butter and garlic in a non-stick skillet over low heat. Cover skillet and cook until garlic is golden brown, about 7 minutes. Add shrimp and lobster meat; stir, cover skillet, and cook until shrimp are bright pink and cooked through, about 5 minutes. Add lemon juice and cayenne pepper; stir, cover skillet, and cook for 5 more minutes. Whisk water-flour mixture and stir into shrimp mixture. Sprinkle Parmesan cheese over shrimp mixture; cook and stir over medium heat until thickened, about 1 minute. Remove skillet from heat and spoon shrimp filling onto each crepe. Roll each crepe around filling and place in the prepared baking dish. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Combine 1 cup milk, mayonnaise, and 1 tablespoon flour in a small saucepan; cook and stir over medium heat until bubbling, 2 to 3 minutes. Drizzle sauce over filled crepes. Bake in the preheated oven until crepes are cooked through and sauce is bubbling, 25 to 30 minutes.
Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat; saute onion until translucent, 5 to 10 minutes. Add eggs to onion and season with salt. Cook and stir until eggs are set, about 5 minutes. Stir shrimp and cocktail sauce into eggs; cook until warm, 3 to 4 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Prepare 12 muffin cups with cooking spray. Cook bacon in a large skillet over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned but not yet crispy, 7 to 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on paper towels. Line the walls of each muffin cup with a bacon strip. Beat eggs with salt and pepper in a large bowl; ladle into muffin cups to about 3/4-full. Sprinkle cheddar cheese over the top of each portion. Bake in preheated oven until golden brown on top and the egg doesn't jiggle, 20 to 35 minutes. Remove from oven and use a butter knife or spoon to remove from muffin tin promptly so that they don't stick.
Blend ice, milk, pumpkin puree, yogurt, banana, cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg, allspice, and vanilla in a blender until smooth.
Blend almond milk, oats, strawberries, blueberries, clementines, apple, avocado, flax seeds, honey, coconut oil, and chia seeds together in a blender until smooth, 30 to 60 seconds.
Stir eggs, red bell pepper, green bell pepper, and onion together in a bowl. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium-high heat. Pour egg mixture into skillet, cook until eggs are set on the bottom, 2 to 3 minutes; flip and cook until eggs are set completely, about 1 minute more.
Blend milk, orange juice, mango, peach, pineapple, and strawberries together in a blender until smooth.
Beat cream cheese, egg yolk, and 1/4 cup sugar together in a bowl until smooth. Pour melted butter into a separate shallow bowl. Mix remaining 3/4 cup sugar and cinnamon together in a third shallow bowl. Spread even amounts of the cream cheese mixture onto one side of each bread slice. Roll the bread into a cylinder around the cream cheese filling. Brush melted butter around the outside of each cylinder and roll the cylinders in the cinnamon-sugar mixture to coat. Arrange the rolls in a dish, cover with plastic wrap, and freeze for at least 2 hours. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Transfer frozen rolls to a baking dish and bake in preheated oven until hot in the center, 10 to 12 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Mix all-purpose flour, rice flour, stevia powder, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a bowl. Beat bananas, almond milk, vegetable oil, and egg together in a bowl using an electric mixer until smooth. Stir banana mixture into flour mixture; fold in pine nuts and flax seeds. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted in the center of the loaf comes out clean, about 1 hour.
Mix eggs with hash browns. Stir in veggies and seasonings. Spray or brush oil on your waffle iron and heat up. Pour enough batter to cover the lower cooking surface. Close lid and cook per manufacturers instructions until golden brown. Serve hot with sour cream and salsa.
Mix nonfat dry milk powder, instant coffee granules, sugar, cocoa powder, pumpkin pie spice, cinnamon, and ground red pepper in a bowl until thoroughly combined. Store in an airtight lidded container or a resealable plastic  bag.
Bring a large pot of lightly salted water to a boil. Cook elbow macaroni in the boiling water, stirring occasionally until cooked through but firm to the bite, 8 minutes. Drain. Mix macaroni, mushroom soup, ham, milk, and Cheddar cheese in a bowl; fold in diced hard-boiled eggs. Spoon mixture into a 9x13-inch casserole dish. Cover dish with plastic wrap and refrigerate 8 hours to overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove plastic wrap from dish. Bake in the preheated oven for 30 minutes; layer sliced hard-boiled eggs on top of casserole. Bake until casserole is cooked through and bubbling, about 10 more minutes.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage and onion in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Set sausage mixture aside to cool. Sift flour, baking powder, and salt into a bowl. Beat milk and eggs in another large bowl; stir flour mixture into egg mixture until batter is smooth. Add cooled sausage and onion to batter. Heat a non-stick griddle or skillet over medium-high heat. Pour about 1/4 cup portions of batter onto hot skillet. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 3 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 3 more minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch square casserole dish. Place a steamer insert into a saucepan and fill with water to just below the bottom of the steamer. Bring water to a boil. Add broccoli, cover, and steam until tender, 2 to 4 minutes. Mix steamed broccoli, bread cubes, diced tomatoes, ham, and pepper jack cheese together in a large bowl. Beat eggs, cream, garlic powder, salt, and pepper together in a separate bowl; stir into broccoli mixture. Pour mixture into the prepared casserole dish. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set in the middle, about 35 minutes. Allow to cool for 3 to 5 minutes before cutting.
Peel orange and save a 1x1-inch piece of the peel. Place orange, orange peel piece, carrots, and cucumber in a blender; pour in water. Blend until desired consistency is reached; add sugar and lemon juice. Blend until smooth, 1 to 3 minutes.
Blend milk, egg, sugar, cinnamon, and vanilla extract in a blender until smooth.
Heat vegetable oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion, ham, potatoes, tomatoes, green onions, and garlic in the hot oil until potatoes are tender, 15 to 20 minutes. Transfer vegetable mixture to a plate. Pour eggs into the same skillet and season with salt and pepper. Tilt skillet until eggs cover the entire bottom; cook over low heat until eggs are set in the middle, about 5 minutes. Spoon about 1/4 cup vegetable mixture onto 1 side of the omelet; sprinkle half the Cheddar cheese over vegetable mixture. Fold the other half of omelet over the filling. Top omelet with remaining Cheddar cheese.
Mix eggs, milk, butter, vanilla extract, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Line an air fryer basket with parchment paper. Dip each piece of bread into the milk mixture and place in the basket. Make sure they are not touching; cook in batches if necessary. Preheat the air fryer to 370 degrees F (188 degrees C). Add basket and cook bread for 6 minutes; flip and cook for 3 minutes more. Sprinkle each stick with confectioners' sugar.
Crack whole egg gently into a small ramekin. Place egg white in a second ramekin. Beat with a fork for 30 seconds and set aside. Melt 2 tablespoons butter in a nonstick pan over medium heat. Add ham, onion, and bell pepper. Cook until ham is heated through and vegetables are tender, 2 to 3 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Melt remaining butter in the nonstick pan over medium heat. When butter bubbles, pour egg into the center of the pan. Pour egg white in a circular motion around the outside of the egg to increase overall size. Quickly sprinkle ham mixture and Cheddar cheese over egg whites before they set. Cover pan and cook until egg is cooked to desired doneness and cheese is melted, 2 to 5 minutes. Serve immediately.
Preheat an air fryer to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Toss sweet potato, bacon, olive oil, paprika, salt, pepper, and dill in a large bowl. Place mixture into the preheated air fryer. Cook for 12 to 16 minutes. Check and stir after 10 minutes and then every 3 minutes until crispy and browned.
Heat oven to 350 degrees F. In large bowl, stir together oats, brown sugar, baking powder, cinnamon, and salt. Combine well. In separate bowl stir together milk, vanilla, and egg whites. Add to oat mixture. Stir to combine well. Let stand about 5 minutes until liquid is absorbed. Coat 6 muffin pan cups with nonstick spray. Portion oat mixture evenly into cups. Top each with 1 tablespoon apple, pressing lightly. Bake 20 minutes or just until firm. Let stand in pan on wire rack 5 minutes. Serve warm or at room temperature. Refrigerate or freeze leftovers. Reheat in microwave oven on High 30 seconds to 1 minute or until heated as desired.
Combine milk and lemon juice in a bowl and set aside to sour, about 5 minutes. Add beaten egg and melted butter; stir to combine. Combine spelt flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a large bowl. Stir gently into milk mixture until just combined; batter will be lumpy. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour the bottom and 1/2 inch up the sides of a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Stir together 1/3 cup sugar, pecans, and cinnamon in a small bowl. Stir together flour, baking powder, salt, and remaining 1 cup sugar in a large bowl. In another bowl, beat egg with a fork; stir in milk and oil. Add egg mixture to flour mixture. Stir until just moistened; batter should be lumpy. Fold in rhubarb. Spoon 1/2 of the batter into prepared pan, then sprinkle with 1/2 of the cinnamon mixture. Repeat with remaining batter and cinnamon mixture. Using a table knife or thin metal spatula, cut down through batter and pull up in a circular motion to marble the cinnamon mixture. Bake until a toothpick inserted in center comes out clean, 55 to 60 minutes. Transfer pan to a wire rack and let cool 10 minutes. Remove bread and let cool completely on rack, at least 30 minutes. Wrap bread with plastic wrap and let stand at room temperature, 8 hours to overnight, before slicing. You don't have to wait overnight, but the bread is much easier to slice and has a better texture if you do.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Grease a 2-quart square baking dish. On a rimmed baking sheet, bake oats and pecans 4 to 5 minutes or until fragrant and lightly toasted. Cool 5 minutes. In a medium bowl, stir together the oats and pecans, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt. In another medium bowl, combine milk, maple syrup or honey, eggs, butter, and vanilla. Whisk until thoroughly combined. Set aside 1/2 cup of the HERSHEY'S Semi-Sweet Chocolate Chips for topping the baked oatmeal. Pour the remaining chocolate chips into the prepared baking dish, spreading into an even layer. Cover the chocolate with the dry oat mixture, then drizzle the wet ingredients over the oats. Stir once or twice to gently combine, but do not combine completely. Sprinkle reserved chocolate chips over the top, along with raspberries (if using). Bake 35 to 40 minutes or until set and golden. Let stand 15 minutes before serving. If desired, add additional HERSHEY'S Semi-Sweet Chocolate Chips, maple syrup, and/or honey for serving.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain on paper towels and crumble into bits. Keep skillet warm. Whisk eggs, milk, and salt together in a bowl. Pour into the hot skillet. Cook and stir over medium-high heat until eggs are set, about 5 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Heat oil in same skillet over medium-high heat. Add frozen potatoes, garlic salt, and pepper. Fry until browned on the bottom, 4 to 5 minutes. Flip and cook until other side is browned, 4 to 5 minutes more. Let cool. Cut 10 squares of aluminum foil slightly larger than the tortillas. Lay 1 tortilla on each square; evenly distribute Cheddar cheese on top. Add eggs, bacon, salsa, and potatoes to each tortilla, in that order. Tightly roll the burritos, tucking tops and bottoms in first. Wrap aluminum foil tightly around each burrito, covering it completely. Place in resealable plastic bags in a single layer. Remove as much air as possible from the bags before sealing. Store in the freezer until ready to reheat. Reheat by removing the aluminum foil, placing the burrito on a microwave-safe plate, and topping it with a paper towel. Heat in the microwave until evenly warmed through, 1 to 2 minutes.
Combine flour, oats, brown sugar, baking powder, baking soda, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and cinnamon in a large bowl. Melt 1/2 cup peanut butter and 1/4 cup butter together in a large microwave-safe liquid measuring cup in the microwave for 30 seconds. Whisk in buttermilk and egg. Add to flour mixture; stir just until combined. Fold chocolate chips gently into batter; allow to rest for 5 minutes. Make the peanut butter sauce by melting 1/4 cup peanut butter and 1/4 cup butter together in a large microwave-safe liquid measuring cup in the microwave for 30 seconds. Whisk in confectioners' sugar and 1/8 teaspoon salt. Heat a large nonstick skillet over low heat; coat with cooking spray. Pour in 1/3 cup batter; spread with the back of a spoon into a circle just over 1/4-inch thick. Sprinkle with candy-coated chocolate pieces. Cook until edges are set; 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook 1 to 2 minutes more. Transfer to a plate; top with peanut butter sauce and more chocolate candies.
Add Quaker(R) Oats to a container of your choice and pour in milk. Alternate between layers of yogurt, almond butter, and banana. Top with dark chocolate, chia seeds, and honey. Refrigerate overnight and enjoy in the morning! Top with additional dark chocolate, sliced almonds, and maple syrup if desired.
Preheat an electric griddle to 225 degrees F (107 degrees C). Blend eggs and cream cheese in a blender until smooth. Add maple syrup, coconut flour, and cinnamon; blend until batter is smooth. Spray the preheated griddle with cooking spray. Pour batter onto the griddle to form small pancakes. Cook until edges set and do not tear when lifted with a spatula, 5 to 7 minutes. Flip pancakes gently with 2 rubber spatulas. Cook until second side is set, about 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter, spraying griddle between batches.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Cook bacon (in batches, if necessary) in a 12-inch ovenproof nonstick skillet over medium heat, turning, until crisp, about 8 minutes. Transfer bacon to paper towels to drain. Remove skillet from heat and pour off all but 1 tablespoon bacon fat. Bring a saucepan of salted water to a boil. Break each ramen noodle block into 4 pieces and cook, stirring occasionally, until just tender, about 3 minutes. Drain noodles in a colander and rinse under cold water. Heat bacon fat in skillet over medium-high heat until shimmering. Add noodles, spreading them evenly to cover bottom of skillet. Cook noodles, pressing on them occasionally with a slotted spatula, until underside is golden brown, 3 to 6 minutes. Slide ramen cake onto a large plate, invert a second plate over top, then flip cake over (so cooked side is now on top). Add 1 tablespoon oil to skillet. Slide ramen cake back into skillet and cook over medium-high heat, pressing it occasionally, until underside is golden brown, 3 to 5 minutes. Remove skillet from heat. Sprinkle cheese evenly over ramen cake and transfer skillet to oven. Bake until cheese is melted, 5 to 10 minutes. Slide ramen cake onto a cutting board and cut into 4 wedges. Wipe out skillet. Heat butter and remaining 1/2 tablespoon oil in skillet over medium heat. Crack eggs into skillet and cook to desired doneness, 2 to 3 minutes for runny yolks. Serve each ramen wedge with a fried egg and 2 slices bacon.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Mix bananas, oats, peanut butter, protein powder, salt, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Drop tablespoonfuls of banana mixture 2 inches apart onto a nonstick baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until golden, about 15 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack; let cool, about 20 minutes.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a rimmed baking sheet with cooking spray. Mix oats, flour, shredded coconut, pecans, and cinnamon together in a large bowl. Stir in honey, coconut oil, and vanilla extract until evenly incorporated. Spread oat mixture on the prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly golden, about 10 minutes. Stir gently. Continue baking, stirring every 5 minutes, until golden brown, 10 to 15 minutes. Let cool until crispy, about 15 minutes. Store in airtight container.
Combine water and salt in a saucepan; bring to a boil. Mix oats, pumpkin puree, and pumpkin pie spice into boiling water; return liquid to a boil. Boil oatmeal for 1 minute; remove from heat and cover saucepan with a lid. Place oatmeal in the refrigerator and chill, 8 hours to overnight. Stir oatmeal; heat in the saucepan over low heat, stirring constantly, until heated through, about 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F. Cook crumbled sausage in large skillet on medium heat until brown, stirring occasionally. Drain sausage. Spread in lightly greased 11x7-inch baking dish. Sprinkle cheese over sausage. Beat eggs, water, milk and Gravy Mix in medium bowl with wire whisk until well blended. Pour over cheese. Arrange bread cubes evenly over mixture. Drizzle butter over bread, if desired. Sprinkle with paprika. Bake, uncovered, 40 minutes or until knife inserted in center comes out clean. Let stand 10 minutes before serving.
Season both sides of skirt steak with carne asada seasoning. Refrigerate at least 30 minutes. Preheat an outdoor grill for medium-high heat and lightly oil the grate. Cook steak until each side is seared, 6 to 8 minutes per side or to desired doneness. An instant-read thermometer inserted into the center should read 150 degrees F (65 degrees C). Transfer to a plate and let rest 10 minutes before slicing into thin slices and then into small chunks. Keep warm. Bake steak fries according to package directions. Combine tomatoes, onions, cilantro, and red pepper flakes in a mixing bowl. Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Crack eggs into skillet and cook to desired doneness. Divide fries among 4 serving places. Top with carne asada, some of the tomato-onion mixture, shredded cheese, egg, and guacamole.
Heat olive oil in large nonstick skillet over medium-high heat and cook onion 3 minutes or until softened. Stir in Green Giant Riced Cauliflower and Sweet Potatoes, red pepper, garlic and salt and cook 5 minutes, stirring occasionally, or until vegetables are tender. Stir in kale and cook 2 minutes or until wilted. Stir in sriracha. Serve eggs over hash.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Prick pie crust all over with a fork; place on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly golden, about 15 minutes. Remove crust and set aside to cool slightly; reduce oven temperature to 375 degrees (190 degrees C). Bring a large pot of water to a boil and simmer leeks just until tender, about 7 minutes; drain thoroughly. Whisk eggs, heavy cream, milk, chives, nutmeg, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl. Spread leeks evenly over bottom of pie crust; dot with goat cheese. Pour egg mixture over leeks. Bake in the preheated oven until puffed, lightly browned, and a sharp knife inserted near the center comes out clean, 40 to 50 minutes. Remove to cool until warm or room temperature before serving.
Place the red onion, red bell pepper, peas, ginger, carrots, salt, and pepper in a medium bowl.  Stir together, and then fold in the tuna. In a small bowl, whisk the sesame oil, rice vinegar, lime juice, and Sriracha(R).  Pour over the tuna mixture and toss gently, trying not to break up the tuna. Add a tablespoon of vinegar to a pan of lightly-salted water and bring it to a gentle simmer, not a hard boil (you'll see little bubbles in the pan).  Crack each egg into a ramekin.  Stir the water in a wide circle (like a whirlpool), and then slide in the egg; repeat for the second egg.  Poach the eggs at a simmer for 4-5 minutes for soft yolks.  Remove the poached eggs with a slotted spoon to a paper towel and allow to drain. To serve, top half of an English muffin with half of the tuna mixture, place a poached egg on top, and then sprinkle with the chopped cilantro and black sesame seeds.
Place strawberries, banana and yogurt in blender container. Pulse until fruit is well blended, scraping sides of container, if necessary. Add ice; pulse until ice is well blended. Pour into glass and top with one serving (2 tablespoons) Reddi-wip. Serve immediately.
Layer cucumber, banana, ginger, and chia seeds in a blender; add orange juice. Blend mixture until smooth, adding water for a thinner smoothie.
Layer apple, pineapple, cashew butter, coconut, flax meal, vanilla extract, and cinnamon into a blender; add almond milk. Blend mixture until smooth.
Whisk water, almond flour, vegetable oil, cream, baking powder, and vanilla extract together in a microwave-safe bowl. Cook in the microwave on high until gooey batter forms, 1 1/2 to 2 minutes. Let batter rest until cooled slightly, 1 to 2 minutes. Whisk in egg until well-blended. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 4 to 5 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Grease a 10x9-inch baking dish. Layer half the tortilla pieces into the bottom of the prepared dish; top with 2 cans green chilies, half the cooked sausage, and half the cheese, respectively. Repeat layering. Beat eggs, milk, salt, garlic salt, onion salt, black pepper, and cumin together in a bowl; pour over the layers in the baking dish. Cover baking dish with plastic wrap and refrigerate 8 hours to overnight. Remove dish from refrigerator and let warm at room temperature for 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake the casserole bake in the preheated oven for 50 minutes. Arrange a layer of tomato slices atop the casserole and continue baking until a knife inserted into the middle of the casserole comes out clean, 10 to 15 minutes more. Let casserole cool 10 minutes before cutting.
Heat oil in a skillet or wok over medium heat. Cook kimchi in hot oil until softened, about 2 minutes; add eggs. Cook and stir eggs and kimchi together until the eggs are set, 2 to 3 minutes.
Blend ice cubes, almond milk, banana, cocoa powder, and vanilla extract together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Press pie crust into a pie plate. Place cream cheese in a microwave-safe bowl; heat in microwave until warmed, about 10 seconds. Stir cream cheese and milk together in a bowl; stir into beaten eggs. Stir Cheddar cheese into egg mixture; add kale and bacon. Pour egg mixture into the pie crust. Bake in the preheated oven until top has golden brown spots and a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, about 45 minutes.
Layer orange, banana, ice cubes, honey, and ginger in the blender; top with yogurt. Blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Combine coconut flour and cinnamon in a bowl. Add zucchini, egg, 1 1/2 teaspoon maple syrup, and vanilla extract and mix well. Spread zucchini mixture into the form of a pizza crust on the prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until zucchini "crust" is cooked through, about 15 minutes. Cool "crust". Spread yogurt onto zucchini "crust" and top with strawberries, grapes, banana, orange zest, and a drizzle of maple syrup.
Blend spinach, banana, coconut milk, mango, and coconut water in a blender until smooth. Pour smoothie into a bowl and top with raspberries, blueberries, granola, coconut flakes, almonds, and chia seeds.
Preheat oven to 425F. In large bowl, whisk together mustard, oil, salt and pepper until combined. Add potatoes and mushrooms and toss to coat. Spread potato mixture evenly onto 2 lightly oiled or nonstick rimmed baking pans and roast in oven for 35-40 minutes or until potatoes and mushrooms have started to brown, stirring halfway through cooking. Add any leftover bacon or ham to the mixture and stir. Add in roasted peppers to oven-safe serving casserole (if desired) and top with cheese. Bake for additional 10-15 minutes or until cheese has softened and begun to melt. Top hash with eggs cooked to your preference and sliced basil.
Place sweet potatoes on a microwave-safe plate. Prick sweet potatoes with the tip of a knife. Microwave until very soft, about 10 minutes. Let cool briefly until safe to handle. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Halve sweet potatoes and scoop flesh out into a bowl. Separate egg whites and yolks into individual mixing bowls. Generously butter four 5-ounce ramekins. Transfer 1 cup mashed sweet potato to the bowl of egg yolks. Pour in milk. Season with salt and cayenne. Whisk until smooth, slowly at first and faster once mixture starts to come together. Add a pinch of salt to the egg whites. Beat with a clean whisk until peaks are well-defined but still soft. Transfer 1/2 of the egg whites to the sweet potato mixture. Fold in with a spatula somewhat gently until most of the white streaks disappear. Add the remaining egg whites and fold in very gently, turning the bowl and scraping the sides, until whites are mostly blended in; a few streaks should still be visible. Gently spoon sweet potato mixture into the ramekins. Bake in the preheated oven until fully inflated and browned, about 15 minutes. Garnish with sage. Unmold or serve in ramekins.
Spray the inside of a 4-quart slow cooker with cooking spray. Place diced apples into the slow cooker; add oats, brown sugar, cinnamon, vanilla extract, pumpkin pie spice, and water. Cook on Low for 8 hours; switch cooker to Warm until ready to serve.
Combine butter and potatoes in a large nonstick skillet over medium-high heat. Cook until potatoes are slightly browned on the edges, 5 to 7 minutes. Add eggs to the skillet with the potatoes and cook until set, 5 to 7 minutes more. Add Cheddar cheese, pepper jack cheese, and picante sauce. Mix with potatoes and eggs until thoroughly incorporated. Add crushed chips to the skillet and stir until well mixed. Divide egg mixture evenly among tortillas and roll up burrito-style.
Layer protein powder, flax meal, cocoa powder, and brown sugar in a blender; add almond milk, banana, berries, and peanut butter. Blend until smooth, about 1 minute.
Blend flax seeds in a blender until finely ground; add pepitas and blend until ground, about 1 minute. Place mango, banana, water, ice cubes, and kale in the blender; blend until smooth, kale is fully incorporated, and the smoothie is uniform in color, about 3 minutes. Thin with more water to reach desired consistency.
Place bacon slices in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain slices on paper towels. Crumble into pieces and set aside. Spray another skillet with cooking spray and heat over medium-low heat. Crack eggs side by side into the skillet; season with salt and black pepper. Cook until egg whites are set and firm, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip eggs. Sprinkle bacon pieces and Cheddar cheese over one egg. Continue cooking to desired doneness and cheese is melted, 3 to 4 minutes more.  Place second egg on top. Transfer to serving dish.
Blend soy milk, banana, yogurt, peanut butter, and tahini together in a blender. Add flax seed meal, almond flour, wheat germ, and protein powder; blend to combine.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Mix mashed bananas, oats, frozen fruit, applesauce, vanilla extract, cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt together in a large bowl until well-combined. Spread mixture evenly on a nonstick jelly roll pan or rimmed baking sheet. Use a thick rolled piece of aluminum foil to block off edges if mixture does not reach all the way across. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, about 25 minutes. Let cool in the pan, about 15 minutes. Cut into bars.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a round baking dish with olive oil and line with parchment paper. Beat eggs in a bowl until frothy; add milk, basil, rosemary, mint, thyme, salt, and pepper and mix well. Mix honey and lemon zest into Greek yogurt. Stir yogurt mixture and Scamorza cheese into eggs. Pour egg mixture into the prepared baking dish and top with Parmesan cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until set in the center, about 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x9-inch baking dish. Mix milk, peanut butter, applesauce, egg, honey, apple, apricots, dates, and nuts together in a large bowl until well-combined. Stir in oats, cinnamon, nutmeg, and baking soda until evenly distributed. Spread mixture into prepared baking dish. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, 35 to 40 minutes. Cool in the pans for 10 minutes before cutting into 12 bars.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Spray with cooking spray. Combine soy milk, eggs, stevia, olive oil, lemon juice, vanilla extract, salt, pumpkin pie spice, cinnamon, cloves, and nutmeg together in a bowl. Stir in buckwheat flour and baking powder; mix just until smooth batter forms. Pour batter into preheated waffle iron and cook according to manufacturer's instructions; repeat with remaining batter.
Blend almond milk, ice cubes, banana, coffee, protein powder, honey, and peanut butter in a blender on low speed. Gradually turn speed up to high and blend until smooth, 20 to 30 seconds.
Blend cottage cheese, eggs, flour, coconut oil, and vanilla extract together in a blender until batter is smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil and place a rack on top. Arrange bacon on the rack and place in a cold oven. Heat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Cook bacon while oven heats until slightly cooked but not crisp, 5 to 10 minutes. Blot excess grease with paper towels. Grease 16 muffin cups or line with paper liners. Unroll cinnamon roll dough into a flat sheet on a work surface. Cut strips in half widthwise. Place a piece of bacon on each dough strip and roll dough to enclose the bacon. Place rolls in the prepared muffin cups. Bake in the preheated oven until rolls are golden brown, 13 to 17 minutes. Cool slightly. Top cinnamon roll bites with icing from package.
Mix water, yeast, and salt together in a large bowl until mixture becomes foamy, about 10 minutes. Stir flour into yeast mixture until well incorporated. The dough will be loose and look wet. Cover bowl loosely with a damp towel and let sit for about 5 hours. Shape dough into 2 loaves using damp hands. Place loaves on a cornmeal-dusted work surface and score the tops a few times with a sharp knife. Allow loaves to double in size, 30 to 60 minutes. Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Place loaves on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven, spraying the surface of the dough occasionally with water, until golden brown, about 20 minutes.
Place strawberries in a bowl; add warm water. Blend milk and spinach together in a blender until smooth. Add blueberries, banana, and honey and blend until smooth. Add strawberries-water mixture and lemon juice and blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Spray an 8x8-inch glass baking dish with cooking spray. Mix oats, brown sugar, oat bran, chia seeds, baking powder, cinnamon, orange peel, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk milk, eggs, honey, butter, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Layer strawberries into the prepared baking dish; top with oat mixture. Pour milk mixture over oat mixture and top with blueberries. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned and set, 23 to 28 minutes.
Blend milk, avocado, ice, vanilla protein powder, and matcha green tea powder together in a blender until smooth.
Combine milk, matcha green tea powder, ice, and vanilla syrup, respectively in a blender; blend to desired consistency. Serve with whipped cream on top.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Thread 1 end of a piece of bacon onto a skewer; add a ham cube and fold bacon over the ham through the skewer. Add a piece of sausage and fold bacon over sausage. Repeat with remaining bacon, ham, and sausage. Spread bacon, ham, and sausage out onto the skewer so bacon isn't squeezed too closely to the meat. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes. Combine barbeque sauce and grape jelly in a microwave-safe bowl; heat in microwave for 30 seconds. Stir sauce and brush over skewers. Continue baking skewers, basting every 10 minutes, until bacon is desired crispness, 15 to 30 minutes more.
Heat butter in a large oven-safe skillet over medium heat; cook and stir kale, about 2 minutes. Add water and cover skillet; cook, stirring frequently, until kale is wilted, about 5 minutes. Remove lid and cook, stirring frequently, until water is evaporated, 2 to 3 minutes. Mix potatoes, salmon, and capers into kale; cook and stir until heated through, 3 to 5 minutes. Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Pour eggs over kale-salmon mixture; cook, stirring gently and scraping the bottom of the skillet to prevent sticking, until barely set, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle feta cheese over egg mixture. Broil in the preheated oven until top is browned and eggs are set and puffed, about 5 minutes. Allow frittata to sit in skillet for a few minutes before serving.
Stir milk, cornstarch, butter, salt, and black pepper together in a saucepan over medium heat; cook and stir until the mixture is thick and smooth, about 20 minutes. Stir egg slices into the sauce and cook until just warmed, about 5 minutes. Ladle egg and sauce over toast slices.
Bring a large pot of lightly salted water to a boil. Cook the bow-tie pasta at a boil, stirring occasionally, until cooked through yet firm to the bite, about 12 minutes; drain. Beat eggs and sour cream together in a bowl until smooth. Heat a large skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir eggs mixture until mostly cooked into solid bits with very little moisture remaining, about 3 minutes; season with salt and pepper. Add hot dogs to the eggs and continue cooking until the hot dogs are heated through and the eggs have finished cooking, about 5 minutes more. Stir drained pasta into the eggs. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese over the egg and pasta mixture; stir to melt the cheese slightly.
Process ricotta cheese and cream cheese in a food processor until smooth and creamy; add egg yolk, melted butter, sugar, vanilla extract, and salt and process until fluffy. Divide cheese mixture between the crepes. Spread filling into a thin layer and roll crepes around the filling. Melt 1 teaspoon butter in a skillet over medium heat. Fry 3 crepes in melted butter until heated through, 1 to 2 minutes per side; repeat with remaining butter and crepes.
Place sausage in a large cast iron skillet over medium heat; cook and stir until crumbly and starting to brown, about 5 minutes. Stir in potatoes; cook until starting to brown, about 5 minutes. Add onion and garlic; cook and stir until fragrant, about 3 minutes. Stir in mushrooms; cook until tender, about 5 minutes. Push mixture to the sides of the skillet with a spatula to make space in the center. Crack eggs into the center and sprinkle with parsley. Sprinkle Mexican cheese blend around mixture on the edges. Cover skillet and cook until egg whites are set but yolk is still runny, 2 to 3 minutes. Remove from heat, pierce yolks and mix to combine. Season with salt and black pepper.
Place water and oats in a microwave-safe bowl. Cook at 50% power, stirring half way through cooking, until oats are softened, 3 to 5 minutes. Stir in butter until melted. Stir in bacon bits and Creole seasoning until evenly distributed.
Combine almond milk, avocado, blueberries, banana, ice, and chia seeds in a blender; blend until smooth.
Combine tea, pineapple, cantaloupe, pear, yogurt, and mint leaves in a blender. Blend until smooth.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Spray a 9x13-inch baking dish with oil. In a medium bowl, whisk together milk, ginger and eggs. In a large bowl, toss together pancake mix and pecans, and then whisk in milk mixture, just until combined. Stir in half of the sausage and apples, and then pour into the dish. Scatter remaining sausage and apples over the top, pressing down gently to submerge them somewhat. Drizzle syrup over the top and bake until puffed and deep golden-brown, about 40 minutes. Serve with more maple syrup on the side.
Preheat broiler. Place English muffin halves on baking sheet; set aside. Spray large skillet with cooking spray. Heat over medium-high heat. Add sausage, onion, bell pepper and mushrooms; cook 5 minutes or until sausage is crumbled and vegetables are tender, stirring occasionally. Drain. Remove from skillet and keep warm. Reduce heat to medium. Add eggs to same skillet; sprinkle with salt and black pepper. Cook without stirring until edges and bottom begin to set. Gently turn to scramble; continue cooking until set. Broil English muffin halves 2 minutes or until toasted. Top halves evenly with sausage mixture, scrambled eggs and cheese. Broil 3 minutes more or until cheese melts. Serve immediately.
Whisk eggs together in a bowl. Mix in onion, milk, green bell pepper, red bell pepper, jalapeno pepper, chile powder, onion powder, cumin, cinnamon, salt, and pepper. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat; grease with cooking spray. Pour in egg mixture; cook and stir until golden brown, about 5 minutes per side.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with non-stick aluminum foil. Combine potatoes, mushrooms, onion, red bell pepper, garlic, olive oil, salt, and pepper in a large bowl until evenly coated. Spread potato mixture onto the prepared baking sheet. Roast in the preheated oven for 15 minutes. Remove baking sheet from oven, stir potato mixture, and continue roasting until potatoes are crisp, about 20 minutes more. Place prosciutto in a skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir until slightly crisp, 3 to 4 minutes. Transfer prosciutto to a cutting board and chop. Top potato mixture with prosciutto, basil, parsley, and Parmesan cheese.
Blend almond milk, spinach, mango, banana, ice cubes, chia seeds, honey, and turmeric in a blender until smooth, about 30 seconds.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). (If using a countertop induction oven, preheat to 390 degrees F (199 degrees C) or use the "Combo 2" setting.) Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil; arrange bacon slices on top. Bake in the preheated oven until bacon is partially cooked through but not crispy, about 10 minutes in the conventional oven and 6 to 7 minutes in the countertop induction oven. Reduce oven temperature to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C); reduce countertop induction oven temperature to 325 degrees F (163 degrees C). Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add garlic; cook and stir until fragrant, about 1 minute. Add spinach; season with salt and pepper. Cook and stir until spinach turns dark green, 3 to 5 minutes. Remove from heat. Cut four 2-inch holes 3/4 of the way through each loaf, evenly spaced apart, using a small serrated knife. Remove bread cutouts with your fingers; discard or set aside for another use. Press 1 tablespoon of the spinach mixture into the bottom of each hole. Line each hole with 1 slice of bacon. Crack 1 egg into each hole; top with 1 tablespoon half-and-half. Season with salt and pepper. Sprinkle 1 tablespoon Parmesan cheese over half-and-half. Transfer loaves to a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set, about 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Heat oil in a 10-inch ovenproof skillet (with lid) over medium heat. Cook green onions, stirring occasionally, until softened, about 2 minutes. Add 1 package spinach and 2 tablespoons water and cook, covered, until wilted, about 1 minute. Stir spinach with tongs, then add remaining package spinach and remaining tablespoon water. Cook, covered, stirring once or twice, until tender, about 2 minutes. Remove skillet from heat. Meanwhile, bring a saucepan of salted water to a boil. Break each ramen noodle block into 4 pieces and cook, stirring occasionally, until just tender, about 3 minutes. Drain noodles in a colander and rinse under cold water. Toss noodles with spinach mixture in skillet and spread mixture evenly over bottom of pan. Blend eggs, spreadable cheese, and salt in a blender until smooth. Pour egg mixture evenly over spinach mixture. Stir spinach mixture gently with a fork to allow egg mixture to flow underneath. Sprinkle top with Parmesan cheese. Transfer skillet to oven and bake until puffed slightly and a toothpick inserted in center comes out clean, about 35 minutes. Cut into 4 wedges and serve from skillet.
Melt 3 tablespoons of butter in a skillet over medium-low heat. Add scallions and parsley; cook and stir constantly until scallions soften, about 2 minutes. Stir in spinach and cover; cook until spinach starts to wilt, about 5 minutes. Uncover and continue to cook, stirring occasionally until flavors combine, about 20 minutes. Beat eggs with an electric mixer in a large bowl until thick and light in color. Beat the spinach mixture into the eggs; add salt and ground black pepper. Melt remaining butter in a heavy 10-inch skillet over medium heat; pour in the egg mixture. Cover and cook until eggs are set, about 10 minutes. Loosen the edges of the pancake with a spatula; turn out onto a serving platter. Cut in two with a sharp knife.
Place cherries, coconut milk, strawberries, banana, and lime juice in a blender. Cover and blend until smooth.
Heat olive oil in a pan over medium heat; add onion and green pepper. Cook and stir until onion is slightly brown, about 5 minutes. Stir in ham and garlic salt. Beat eggs, asparagus, and milk together with a whisk or a fork in a bowl; pour over ham mixture. Add whole Provolone cheese slices or break them into pieces. Cook until eggs begin to set, about 3 minutes. Gently fold the omelet in half; cook until cheese melts, about 2 minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Mix zucchini, eggs, vegetable oil, onion powder, and salt together in a bowl. Stir in potato flakes and baking powder; mix until batter is combined. Pour 1/2 cup of the batter onto the center of the waffle iron. Close the lid; cook until iron stops steaming and waffle is crisp, about 5 minutes.
Place banana in a blender. Add coffee, almond milk, spinach, protein powder, cocoa powder, and stevia sweetener; blend until smooth.
Position rack in upper third of oven; preheat broiler. Heat oil in a large broiler-safe nonstick or cast-iron skillet over medium-high heat. Add onion and zucchini and cook, stirring frequently until soft, about 5 minutes. In a bowl, whisk eggs, salt and pepper together. Pour over the vegetables in the pan. Cook about 2 minutes until nearly set. While cooking lift the edges to allow uncooked egg from the middle to go underneath. Top with Fresh Mozzarella and sun-dried tomatoes, place under broiler until the eggs are slightly browned, about 2 minutes. Let stand for 3 minutes. Top with basil. Slice and serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray 12 muffin cups with cooking spray. Lay 2 ham slices in each muffin cup, overlapping the slices and pressing up the sides to take the shape of the cup. Beat eggs in a bowl; season with salt and pepper. Add onion and beat well. Fill each ham cup 3/4 full with egg mixture; top each with Cheddar cheese and mozzarella cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until egg is cooked through, 15 to 20 minutes. Cool for 5 minutes before serving.
Whisk milk, egg, and cinnamon together in a shallow bowl. Dip panettone slice in the milk mixture; turn to ensure both sides are coated and most of the liquid has been absorbed. Melt butter in a nonstick skillet over medium-low heat. Cook panettone in the hot butter until golden brown, about 5 minutes per side.
Combine oats and chia seeds in a microwave-safe bowl. Stir in coffee. Let stand for 2 minutes. Cook oats in the microwave until tender, about 2 minutes. Stir in milk, cocoa powder, and maple syrup.
Spread butter onto both sides of bread. Cut a 2-inch circle out of the center of the bread. Heat a skillet over medium-high heat. Place bread in the skillet and toast for 1 minute; flip and toast the other side for 1 minute. Crack the egg into the hole of the bread; cook until egg to desired doneness, 2 to 4 minutes. Place Muenster cheese on top of the bread and egg; cook until cheese is melted, 1 to 2 minutes.
Mix flour, brown sugar, baking powder, and salt together in a large bowl. Mash bananas in a large bowl using a fork. Add milk, egg, oil, and vanilla extract; mix well. Stir banana mixture and chocolate chips into the flour mixture until batter is blended but still slightly lumpy. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Drop 1/4 cup batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Top pancakes with strawberries and whipped cream.
Flatten each piece of white bread using a rolling pin. Whisk 1/4 cup butter, sugar, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Whisk eggs, milk, and nutmeg together in a separate bowl. Spread cinnamon butter mixture onto 1 side of each piece bread. Roll bread around the cinnamon butter. Dip rolled bread into the egg mixture. Melt 2 tablespoons butter in a skillet over medium heat; cook the dipped bread rolls until golden, about 2 minutes per side.
Spray a large nonstick skillet with cooking spray; warm over medium-high heat. Add chorizo; cook and stir until browned, about 5 minutes. Whisk eggs and salt together in a bowl. Pour into the skillet; cook and stir until eggs are set, about 5 minutes.
Whisk cocoa powder and sugar together in a bowl until well combined. Add flour, brown sugar, baking soda, baking powder, and salt; continue whisking until evenly mixed. Make a well in the center of the bowl. Whisk buttermilk, eggs, vegetable oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Pour into center of the well of the cocoa mixture; mix until just blended. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Drop 1/4 cup batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Combine tomatoes, chile de arbol peppers, onion, garlic, chicken bouillon, and salt in a saucepan; add enough water to cover. Bring to a boil; reduce heat and cook, stirring occasionally, until tomatoes and peppers soften, 5 to 10 minutes. Transfer chile peppers to a blender using a slotted spoon; blend until smooth. Pour in tomato mixture; blend until smooth. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir corn tortillas in the hot oil until crispy, 3 to 5 minutes. Crack in eggs; stir until scrambled and set, about 5 minutes. Strain blended sauce over tortillas and eggs; mix well.
Whisk flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl. Combine buttermilk, egg, butter, and 1 1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract in a separate bowl. Beat to break up the egg. Pour over the flour mixture; stir until just combined. Stir 1/4 cup sprinkles gently into the batter. Allow batter to rest for 5 minutes. Whisk confectioners' sugar, heavy cream, 1 teaspoon vanilla extract, and salt together in a small bowl until smooth. Add 2 tablespoons sprinkles. Heat a large nonstick skillet over medium-low heat; coat with cooking spray. Drop 1/2 cup batter into the skillet. Spread with the back of a spoon to about 1/4-inch thick. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip. Cook until second side is set, 1 to 2 minutes. Transfer to a plate. Repeat with remaining batter. Stir sprinkle sauce so sprinkles rise to the top. Serve pancakes with a generous drizzle of sprinkle sauce.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Beat egg whites, salt, and pepper in a bowl with an electric mixer until stiff peaks form. Fold Parmesan cheese in gently. Make 2 mounds of egg whites on the prepared baking sheet. Create a small indent in the centre of the egg whites with the back of a spoon. Bake egg whites in the preheated oven until lightly browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Remove egg whites from the oven and carefully place 1 yolk in the centre of each indent. Place back in the oven until yolks look set, about 3 minutes. Carefully remove cloud eggs from the parchment paper with a spatula or fish slice; slide onto plates. Sprinkle chives on top.
Blend all ingredients together, very slowly increasing speed from low to high. Blend for 1 1/2 minutes at high.
Mix banana and egg together in a bowl until no lumps remain. Add vanilla extract to the batter. Heat a greased skillet or griddle over medium heat. Pour batter into the pan. Cook until bubbles appear, about 1 minute. Flip and cook until golden, about 1 minute more.
Whisk soy milk, flour, sugar, and cinnamon together in a bowl until well beaten. Pour into a pie pan or other wide, shallow dish. Heat oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Dip each slice of bread into the soy milk mixture and place into the skillet. Cook until golden brown and crispy on both sides, 5 to 7 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 9x5-inch loaf pans. Mix mashed bananas and yogurt together in a bowl. Combine butter, white sugar, and brown sugar in a large bowl; beat using an electric mixer until creamy. Add eggs and vanilla extract and stir to combine. Add banana mixture and mix well. Stir flour, oat flour, rolled oats, baking soda, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Add to the banana-butter mixture and stir just until combined. Don't overmix. Fold chocolate chips and walnuts into the batter. Divide batter between the prepared pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, 50 to 60 minutes. Remove from the oven and cover loosely with aluminum foil for 5 minutes. Remove from the pans and allow to cool completely.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Place sweet potatoes and green onions on the baking sheet. Drizzle with olive oil and sprinkle with garlic powder, salt, and pepper. Toss to combine and spread out evenly. Roast in the preheated oven until soft, about 25 minutes. Meanwhile, cook chorizo in a medium skillet over medium-high heat, breaking apart with a wooden spoon, 8 to 10 minutes. Drain any excess fat; transfer chorizo to a bowl and set aside to cool. Wipe out the skillet and return it to the stove. Whisk eggs in a bowl. Heat butter in the skillet over medium-high heat. Pour in eggs and scramble until just set, 3 to 5 minutes. Scrape eggs into a bowl and let cool. Line up tortillas in assembly-line fashion. Divide chorizo between the 8 tortillas. Top each with a portion of sweet potato-onion mixture, scrambled eggs, 1 tablespoon salsa, and queso fresco. Fold the bottom of each tortilla up over the filling, then fold in both sides and roll up burritos. Flip burritos so they are seam side-down. Wrap each individually with aluminum foil and place into a resealable plastic bag.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil; spray lightly with cooking spray. Place avocados into a blender or food processor. Add honey and blend until a creamy mixture forms and no lumps remain. Add peanut butter, eggs, cocoa powder, and drink mix to the blender. Process until smooth. Add vanilla extract. Scrape down sides and blend until no powder is present. Pour batter into a large bowl. Mix in chocolate chips; batter will be sticky. Drop scoopfuls of batter onto the baking sheet. Press down slightly batter to make a cookie shape. Bake until center is no longer soft, about 12 minutes. Cool for 3 to 5 minutes on baking sheet, then transfer to a rack. Store cooled cookies in the refrigerator.
Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Mix pumpkin seeds, oats, pumpkin puree, maple-flavored syrup, coconut, butter, pumpkin pie spice, cinnamon, and salt together in a bowl until well combined. Spread mixture evenly over the prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven, stirring every 15 minutes, until desired crispness is reached, 30 to 45 minutes.
For each flavor set, stir together all ingredients except granola in a medium bowl. Spoon into 2 small bowls or canning jars. Top with equal amounts of granola, if desired. Cover and refrigerate overnight or for up to 3 days. To reheat, place 1 portion in a microwave-safe container. Microwave on high for 30 to 45 seconds.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Combine butter, sugar, vanilla sugar, and salt in a large bowl; beat with an electric mixer until smooth and creamy. Add eggs one at a time, beating well after each addition. Combine flour and baking powder in a bowl. Beat into butter mixture 1/2 cup at a time, alternating with cream. Add a dash of sparkling water in the end to loosen up the batter. Spray the preheated waffle iron with cooking spray. Pour batter into waffle iron, working in batches, and cook according to manufacturer's instructions, 3 to 5 minutes per waffle.
Arrange bread slices on a cooling rack and allow to dry at room temperature for 30 to 60 minutes. Meanwhile, coat a 3-quart rectangular baking dish with nonstick cooking spray. In a small bowl, beat cream cheese, maple syrup, and cinnamon with a mixer until smooth. Fold in 2 cups blueberries. Arrange 4 slices of bread in prepared dish; spread cream cheese mixture over bread. Top with remaining bread. In a medium bowl, whisk together half-and-half, eggs, and vanilla. Pour over bread. Cover and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Remove dish from refrigerator. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Bake French toast, covered, for 20 minutes. Uncover and bake 20 minutes more, or until top is golden brown. Let stand at room temperature for 15 minutes. If desired, top with additional berries and confectioners' sugar.
Combine cream cheese, eggs, sugar, and cinnamon in a blender; blend until smooth. Let rest 2 minutes or lightly tap on counter to remove bubbles. Heat a skillet over medium heat and grease with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 of the batter into the skillet; cook until bubbles start to form, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook until cooked through, about 1 minute. Transfer to a clean plate. Repeat with remaining batter.
Whisk flour, milk, egg whites, olive oil, and cinnamon together in a large bowl until batter is smooth. Lightly spray a skillet with cooking spray and set over medium heat. Pour 1/4 cup batter into the skillet and rotate skillet so batter spreads to the edges in a thin layer. Cook until bottom is lightly browned, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook other side until bottom is lightly browned, about 2 more minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Mix Greek yogurt and jelly together in a bowl. Spoon a layer of yogurt mixture onto each crepe; roll crepe around filling. Place rolled crepes on serving plates and top with remaining yogurt mixture. Sprinkle each crepe with cinnamon.
Place apple in a plastic microwave-safe bowl; pour in enough water to cover 1/4-inch of the bottom of bowl. Partially cover bowl with a lid or paper towel. Microwave in 1 minute intervals until apple is softened, 2 to 3 minutes. Freeze apple in the same container with water until solid, 2 hours to overnight. Blend frozen apple, almond milk, and pumpkin puree in a blender until smooth; add brown sugar and pumpkin pie spice. Blend until smooth. Add ice and blend until smooth.
Place flour, water, eggs, 2 tablespoons melted butter, and 1/2 teaspoon salt into a blender. Cover and blend for 2 minutes. Chill batter in refrigerator for two hours. Heat an oiled, non-stick skillet over medium heat. Pour in enough of the chilled batter to cover half of the skillet. Tip and rotate the skillet until the batter covers the entire area. Cook until the batter turns from wet to moist, and the edges begin to curl away from the sides of the skillet. Turn the crepe over, and continue cooking until lightly golden on the other side. Place the crepe onto a plate, and cover with a kitchen towel to keep moist. Repeat with the remaining batter, lightly oiling the skillet as needed to keep the crepes from sticking. Cook and stir green onions with 4 tablespoons butter in a skillet over medium-high heat until tender, 3 to 5 minutes. Add sherry, 1/4 teaspoon salt, and 1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper; stir to combine. Mix in crab. Melt 4 tablespoons butter in a saucepan over medium-high heat. Whisk in flour. Add milk, 1/4 salt, and 1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper; bring to a boil for 1 minute. Remove from heat. Beat heavy cream and egg yolks together in a small bowl. Gradually add egg mixture to butter-flour mixture, stirring constantly. Fold in grated cheese to form a thick sauce. Pour sauce into crab meat mixture, reserving 1 cup of the sauce; stir to combine. Lay out one crepe on a flat surface. Spoon 2 heaping spoonfuls of crab mixture at one end of the crepe, then roll crepe up around the filling. Repeat with remaining crepes. Top each with reserved cheese sauce and serve.
Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Bring a pot of lightly salted water to a boil. Prepare a large bowl of ice water. Place poblano peppers on a baking sheet. Broil until skin bubbles and areas of burned skin appear. Dip peppers into boiling water for about 30 seconds, then place immediately into ice water. When peppers are chilled, remove skin. Slit peppers lengthwise and remove veins and seeds. Stuff each pepper with 1/4 the cotija cheese and secure pepper openings closed with toothpicks. Place flour into a shallow bowl and dip each pepper in the flour; set aside for coating to set. Heat vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Beat egg whites in a glass or metal bowl until stiff peaks form. Lift your beater or whisk straight up: the tip of the peak formed by the egg whites should stand up. Gently whisk egg yolks into whites. Dip floured peppers into egg mixture to coat. Fry peppers in the hot oil until browned and the cheese has melted, flipping once, about 5 minutes per side.
Layer yogurt, vanilla extract, canola oil, bread flour, salt, sugar, and yeast into a bread machine in the order recommended by manufacturer's instructions. Set the machine to basic cycle for a 2-pound loaf. Add water in 1-teaspoon increments if dough is too dry after first kneading period. Cool finished bread on a wire rack for 20 minutes before slicing.
Whisk water, milk, eggs, vegetable oil, and salt together in a bowl. Slowly whisk flour into wet ingredients until incorporated. Let batter rest for 1 hour; stir again. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 2 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 4 more minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Press pie crust into a 9-inch deep dish pie plate. Cover the edges of the crust with aluminum foil. Bake pie crust until lightly browned, about 12 minutes. Set pie crust aside to cool. Increase oven heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Cook bacon in a large skillet over medium-high heat until crisp, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on paper towels, while retaining drippings in the skillet. Stir zucchini, mushrooms, onion, and garlic into the reserved bacon drippings; season with Italian seasoning, dill, parsley, garlic salt, and black pepper. Cook and stir the zucchini mixture until the zucchini is tender yet crisp, 5 to 7 minutes; remove from heat. Chop the bacon and stir through the zucchini mixture. Sprinkle about half the mozzarella cheese into the bottom of the pie crust. Spoon zucchini mixture over the mozzarella cheese layer. Pour eggs over the zucchini mixture; top with remaining mozzarella cheese. Sprinkle Parmesan cheese over the mozzarella cheese. Put pie plate onto a baking sheet. Bake in preheated oven until the top begins to brown, about 30 minutes.
Heat a griddle over medium heat. Whisk rice flour, sorghum flour, amaranth, baking powder, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Stir almond milk, applesauce, and egg into flour mixture until batter is just combined. Spray griddle with cooking spray. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Whisk quinoa flour, almond milk, eggs, honey, and sea salt together in a bowl until batter is smooth. Stir butter into batter. Heat a lightly greased a skillet or griddle over medium-low heat. Pour 1/4 cup batter into the skillet and immediately rotate the skillet until the batter evenly coats the bottom in a thin layer. Cook until the top of the crepe is no longer wet and the bottom has turned light brown, about 2 minutes. Run a spatula around the edge of the skillet to loosen; flip crepe and cook until the other side has turned light brown, about 30 seconds. Repeat with remaining batter.
Strain or process quark cheese through a sieve or meat grinder to achieve a powdery consistency. Mix quark cheese, 2/3 cup flour, sugar, raisins, eggs, baking soda, vanilla extract, and salt together in a bowl until batter is well mixed. Pour 1/4 cup flour into a small bowl. Roll batter, about 2 tablespoons per serving, into a ball and roll in flour until coated. Flatten each ball into a 2-inch patty, squaring off the edges. Heat about 1 1/2 tablespoons oil in a skillet over medium-low heat. Fry patties, working in batches, in the hot oil until dark brown and a shell has formed, 3 to 4 minutes per side. Transfer to a paper towel-lined plate. Repeat with remaining oil and patties.
Blend oats, cottage cheese, egg whites, pumpkin puree, milk, pumpkin pie spice, honey, and cinnamon in blender until batter is smooth; pour into a bowl. Heat a pan or skillet over medium heat; spray with cooking spray. Scoop batter, about 1/4 cup per pancake, into the hot pan; cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 2 minutes. Flip pancakes and cook until browned on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Sift flour, powdered milk, sugar, baking powder, cinnamon, and baking soda together in a bowl. Whisk apple cider,  1/4 cup vegetable oil, and eggs together in a separate bowl. Stir apple cider mixture into flour mixture until batter is just combined. Heat 1 teaspoon vegetable oil in a griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend strawberries, orange juice, milk, yogurt, flax seed, protein powder, and ice cube in a blender until smooth, 1 to 2 minutes.
Blend spinach, oats, apple juice, banana, and peanut butter together in a blender or food processor until smooth.
Blend banana, strawberries, milk, yogurt, pumpkin puree, peanut butter, brown sugar, 1/4 teaspoon cinnamon, and nutmeg in a blender until smooth; add ice cubes and again blend until smooth. Pour smoothie into 4 glasses and top with whipped cream and a pinch of cinnamon.
Blend apples, milk, orange juice, banana, protein powder, flax seeds, and ice cube in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Poke holes into each sweet potato using a fork and place in a microwave-safe dish. Add enough water to fill dish about 1/2-inch deep. Cook sweet potatoes in the microwave until tender, about 12 minutes. Transfer sweet potatoes to a work surface until cool enough to handle. Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion and rosemary until onions are softened, 12 to 15 minutes. Remove and discard rosemary sprigs. Stir brown sugar into onions; cook and stir until onions are browned and caramelized, 3 to 4 minutes. Stir mustard into caramelized onions and remove skillet from heat. Slice sweet potatoes into 1/4- to 1/2-inch rounds. Press each pie crust into a 9-inch pie dish. Line both crusts with caramelized onions and top with 1/2 of the sweet potatoes. Sprinkle 1/2 of the goat cheese and 1/2 of the Monterey Jack cheese over sweet potato layer. Spread the remaining 1/2 of the sweet potatoes over the cheese layer and top with remaining goat cheese and Monterey Jack cheese. Beat eggs, milk, and Italian seasoning together in a bowl and pour over each filled pie crust until evenly filling out all the spaces around the sweet potatoes and cheeses. Bake in the preheated oven until quiches are set in the middle, about 40 minutes.
Mix milk, flour, cocoa powder, confectioners' sugar, eggs, vanilla and Diamond Crystal(R) Kosher Salt in a large mixing bowl until smooth and well blended. Melt about 1/3 teaspoon of the butter in a small skillet over medium high heat. Add about 1/4 cup of the batter to the skillet; tilt pan with a circular motion to evenly distribute batter. Cook until bubbles appear and the surface looks dull. Turn the crepe and cook on the other side approximately 1 minute. Place crepe on a plate. Repeat for the remaining crepes, separating them with a layer of waxed paper to prevent them from sticking to each other. Batter is enough to make about 16 crepes. For Chocolate Orange Sauce, place the cream into a medium pan and heat until very warm. Remove pan from heat. Add chocolate and stir until combined and silky. Add orange juice concentrate, vanilla, sugar and Diamond Crystal(R) Kosher Salt; stir until thoroughly mixed. Whip 2 cups whipping cream in a bowl until stiff. To assemble the cake, place a crepe on a serving plate. Spread a thin layer of whipped cream onto crepe; top with another crepe. Continue layering whipped cream and crepes, ending with an unfrosted crepe. Refrigerate for 30 minutes to firm up the cake before serving. To serve, spoon about 4 tablespoons of sauce on a dessert plate in a small circle. Slice cake into wedges. Place a wedge of cake on top of the chocolate orange sauce. Optional garnishes: Peeled orange sections, mint sprigs, or shaved chocolate.
Blend banana, sweet potato, cottage cheese, milk, ice, cocoa powder, molasses, honey, and almond extract together in a high-power blender (such as Ninja(R)) until smooth.
Whisk flour, baking powder, and flax meal together in a bowl; stir orange juice and orange extract into flour mixture until batter is well-combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat, or an electric griddle to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Bring water and rice to a boil in a saucepan. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until rice is tender and liquid is absorbed, 20 to 25 minutes. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Transfer bacon slices to a paper-towel lined plate to drain and crumble into bite-size pieces; reserve rendered bacon fat in skillet. Cook and stir eggs in the same skillet over medium heat until slightly set, 1 to 3 minutes. Stir yellow onion, peas, green onion, and 1 1/2 teaspoons soy sauce into eggs; cook and stir until yellow onion is translucent, about 5 minutes more. Reduce heat to low; stir rice, crumbled bacon, and remaining soy sauce into egg mixture until well-combined and heated through, 1 to 3 minutes.
Pulse yogurt, strawberries, water, powdered milk, banana, blueberries, raspberries, blackberries, and protein powder together in a blender until well-mixed. Add ice, sugar, and honey and blend until smooth.
Put strawberries and mango in a blender; add yogurt, milk, honey, and ice cubes. Blend on high until smooth and thick. Pour smoothie into 4 glasses and garnish each with a fresh strawberry.
Melt 5 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Saute bacon crumbles and onion in hot butter until onion is tender, 5 to 10 minutes. Add eggs; cook and stir until eggs are starting to set but are still moist, about 5 minutes. Melt 5 tablespoons butter in a saucepan over medium-high heat. Whisk flour into butter to form a thick paste. Add milk, Cheddar cheese, salt, and pepper. Cook and stir until cheese is melted and sauce is thick, 5 to 7 minutes. Stir seasoned stuffing mix and 1/4 cup melted butter together in a bowl. Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Stir eggs and cheese sauce together in a bowl; pour into prepared baking dish and spread stuffing mixture over the top. Cover the baking dish with plastic wrap and chill in the refrigerator, 8 hours to overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove plastic wrap from baking dish. Bake casserole in the preheated oven until heated through and set, about 30 minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Prepare the cooking surface with cooking spray. Beat flour, milk, eggs, vegetable oil, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl using an electric mixer until batter is thoroughly mixed. Pour about 1/4 cup batter per waffle into the preheated waffle iron and cook according to manufacturers' instructions. Stir blackberries together in a saucepan over high heat until heated through, 3 to 4 minutes. Decrease heat to medium and add sugar, cornstarch, and lemon juice to blackberries; cook and stir until sauce is thickened, about 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Mix oats, buckwheat, sunflower seeds, and salt in a large bowl. Melt coconut oil in a small saucepan over medium heat; stir in honey and seeds from vanilla bean until mixed. Pour over oat mixture and toss to coat. Spread oat mixture evenly over prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven, stirring every 10 minutes, until granola is lightly brown, 35 to 40 minutes. Stir almonds into granola and continue baking until golden grown, about 5 to 10 minutes more. Allow granola to cool completely, then stir in coconut and raisins. Store in an airtight container.
Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir black beans, onion, and green bell pepper until onion is translucent, 5 to 10 minutes. Beat eggs and milk together in a bowl; add to vegetable mixture and stir in tomatoes. Cook egg mixture until eggs are set, about 5 minutes. Mix Cheddar cheese into egg mixture.
Heat 1 tablespoon of butter in a skillet over medium heat, and cook and stir the onion and green pepper until the onion is translucent, about 5 minutes; stir in ham, and cook until ham is hot, about 1 more minute. Transfer to a bowl, and set aside. Melt 1 more tablespoon of butter in skillet over medium heat, and cook and stir the mushrooms until they have given up their liquid and started to brown, about 10 minutes. Add the cooked mushrooms to the ham mixture. Melt 2 tablespoons of butter in a saucepan over medium heat, and stir in flour, salt, and black pepper. Cook and stir until the flour lightens in color slightly, about 1 minute; gradually whisk in milk, and cook until thickened, whisking constantly. Do not boil. Mix in the Cheddar cheese, and stir until the cheese melts. Reduce heat to a bare simmer, and cook the sauce for about 10 more minutes. Whisk frequently. Drain any juices from the ham and mushroom mixture, and stir the mixture into the sauce; mix in the chopped hard-cooked eggs. Bring mixture back to a simmer, and serve over toasted English muffins.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Heat olive oil in a skillet; cook and stir the garlic in the hot oil until slightly browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Sprinkle in the rosemary and let cook until fragrant, 1 to 2 more minutes. Cook and stir the chard until the leaves are wilted; cover the skillet and let the chard steam until the stems are tender, about 5 minutes. Transfer the chard mixture to a bowl, stir in the tarragon and basil, season to taste with salt and pepper, and let cool. Stir in the mozzarella. Trim the stem and blossom ends from the zucchini and halve lengthwise. Scoop out the flesh with a spoon, leaving a 3/4-inch thick shell. Discard the flesh. Beat 2 eggs with the milk in a bowl. Lightly fill the shells with the chard mixture. Pour the egg mixture over the chard. Bake in the preheated oven until the quiche filling is set and the zucchini shells are tender, about 40 minutes. To prepare crumb topping, melt butter in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir the bread crumbs in the butter until well combined and starting to give off a toasty fragrance, about 2 minutes. Remove the stuffed zucchini from the oven and gently pat the bread crumbs over the top in a layer; return to oven and bake until the crumbs are browned, 10 to 15 more minutes.
Prepare the chai tea using one packet or two tablespoons of dry mix stirred into 3/4 cup hot water. Allow to cool for about 10 minutes. Combine the chai tea, Chardonnay, vanilla extract, egg yolk, frozen raspberries, and butter in the pan of a bread machine. Add the bread flour, rye flour, all-purpose flour, wheat bran, yeast, walnuts, caraway seed, sugar, and salt. Select the "Sweet" setting with a "Light Crust" and press Start. When the bread has finished baking, allow it to cool for at least 30 minutes before slicing and serving.
Heat 1 tablespoon of olive oil and butter in a skillet over medium-low heat, and stir in the shiitake mushroom, shallot, salt, red pepper flakes, and sage. Cook and stir until the shallot is translucent, about 5 minutes. Mix in the turkey and vermouth, and stir for a minute or two just to heat; remove from heat. Beat the eggs with a fork in a bowl until well blended, and season with a pinch of salt and white pepper. Heat 2 teaspoons of olive oil in an omelette pan over medium heat until hot, and pour the beaten eggs into the pan. Use a spatula to gently stir the eggs just until they begin to set, 1 to 2 minutes; shake the pan to cover the bottom completely with egg. Smooth out the top of the partially set eggs with the spatula, cook just until the bottom is firm and the top is still slightly soft, and turn off the heat. Spoon turkey filling into the center of the omelette, filling about the middle third of the omelette; dot with small dollops of creme fraiche. Do not overfill omelet. With spatula, fold the upper third of the egg over the filling, and gently tip the skillet and shake the omelette towards the edge of the skillet. With spatula, fold the omelet over one more time, forming a loose cigar shape, and gently tip the omelet onto a serving plate.
Place the bacon in a large, deep skillet and cook over medium-high heat until evenly browned, about 5 minutes per side. Drain the bacon slices on a paper towel-lined plate. Crumble once cooled. Preheat an oven to 200 degrees F (95 degrees C) to keep the finished waffles warm. Preheat a waffle iron and coat lightly with cooking spray. Combine the all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, Parmesan cheese, parsley, rosemary, basil, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a bowl. Whisk the milk, eggs, butter, and Dijon mustard together in a small bowl. Pour the wet mixture into the dry mixture and stir until just combined. Pour about 1/3 cup batter into each square of the preheated waffle iron; cook until golden, 3 to 4 minutes. Keep prepared waffles in the preheated oven until all are cooked. Stir the sour cream, sugar, and onion together in a small bowl. Drizzle the onion sauce evenly over the warm waffles. Sprinkle crumbled bacon over the waffles to serve.
Mix 2 tablespoons of sugar, 1 teaspoon of orange zest, salt, and flour in a small bowl. Combine milk and yogurt in a separate bowl. Stir in olive oil and mix until smooth. Beat 4 eggs in a large bowl, then add orange juice. Stir in the yogurt mixture followed by the flour mixture. Beat until smooth. Allow batter to rest at room temperature for 1 hour. Beat 1 egg with 3 tablespoons of sugar, then add butter and cottage cheese, mixing until smooth. Stir in the bread crumbs and 1 tablespoon of orange zest. Refrigerate until the batter is ready. Lightly butter a 6 inch skillet, and heat over medium heat.  For each crepe, pour 1/4 cup of the batter into the skillet, and immediately rotate the skillet until the batter evenly coats the bottom in a thin layer. Cook until the top of the crepe is no longer wet and the bottom has turned light brown. Run a spatula around the edge of the skillet to loosen; flip the crepe, and cook until the other side has turned light brown. Stack the crepes in a clean kitchen towel, placing waxed paper between each. Place 2 to 3 tablespoons of the filling onto the golden side of the crepe. Roll the crepe up and repeat until all the blintzes are made. Heat 2 tablespoons of butter in a large skillet and fry 4 to 5 blintzes at a time until golden brown, about 2 minutes on each side.
Slice panettone into 1 inch slices; cut each slice into 4 wedges. In a small bowl, whisk together the mascarpone, orange preserves, and orange juice. In a separate large bowl, whisk the eggs, cinnamon, and nutmeg. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat.  Dip the panettone into the egg mixture, coating well. Place into the hot oil; fry until golden brown, about 3 minutes per side. Serve with the orange mascarpone sauce.
Combine water, oats, and salt in a saucepan; bring to a boil, stirring occasionally. Fold egg into oatmeal until incorporated. Reduce heat to medium-low and simmer oatmeal mixture until egg is cooked, 3 to 5 minutes. Stir in blackberry yogurt and applesauce.
Stir oats, blueberries, milk, peanut butter, agave nectar, vanilla extract, and salt together in a microwave-safe bowl. Cook in microwave on high until the oats are softened, about 90 seconds. Stir until the cooked blueberries have colored the mixture.
Blend oats in a blender until powdery; transfer to a large bowl. Add wheat germ, brown sugar, milk powder, and cinnamon; stir until evenly distributed. Spoon 5 tablespoons oat mixture into 17 individual sandwich bags.
Bring a large pot of lightly salted water to a boil and place a steamer insert into the pot. Break crab legs apart at joints. Place king crab legs into the steamer, cover pot, reduce heat to medium, and steam crab legs until fragrant, 6 to 8 minutes. Remove crab leg segments. When cool enough to handle, crack the crab leg shells, pick off shells, and remove meat. Bring chicken broth to a boil in a saucepan; slowly stir in grits. Reduce heat to low, cover pan, and simmer grits until tender, about 20 minutes. Stir grits occasionally. When grits are thickened and tender, stir Cheddar cheese and diced tomatoes with green chiles into grits until the cheese is smoothly melted. Melt butter with olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. When mixture begins to bubble, stir in green bell pepper and sweet onion; cook until softened, 3 to 4 minutes. Stir in garlic and cook until fragrant, about 2 minutes. Cook and stir crab meat into bell pepper and onion until crab meat is heated through. Gently mix the cheese grits into the crab mixture; simmer 3 to 5 minutes to blend flavors, and serve.
Bring water to a boil in a large saucepan and slowly whisk in grits; reduce heat to medium-low and simmer until thickened and tender, 5 to 7 minutes, stirring occasionally. Stir farmers cheese, goat cheese, and American cheese into grits until cheese has melted. Set grits aside and keep warm. Melt butter with vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir tomato, 2 green onions, and garlic in the hot skillet until the vegetables are tender, 5 to 7 minutes. Stir in bacon drippings until combined. Cook and stir shrimp with vegetables until bright pink, about 5 minutes; season to taste with salt and black pepper. Mix grits into shrimp mixture and stir in half-and-half until smooth. Simmer the mixture to blend flavors, about 5 minutes, and add  sherry. Simmer 3 more minutes before adjusting salt and black pepper. Garnish with sliced green tops of 1 green onion before serving.
Preheat oven to 200 degrees F (95 degrees C). Toss shrimp in a bowl with Dijon mustard until coated and sprinkle with seafood seasoning. Refrigerate shrimp while you complete remaining steps. Pour cream and chicken stock into a large pot and bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low; stir in shallot, butter, garlic powder, and grits. Bring mixture to a simmer and cook until grits have absorbed the liquid and are thick and smooth, about 20 minutes. Season with salt and black pepper. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on a paper towel-lined plate. Wrap Italian bread in aluminum foil and place in preheated oven to heat, about 10 minutes. When bread is hot and the outside is slightly crunchy, slice into triangles. Cut the triangles apart horizontally, place onto a baking sheet, and brush with 2 tablespoons olive oil. Return to oven to toast, about 5 minutes; remove and keep warm. Pour 2 more tablespoons olive oil into skillet with bacon drippings and place skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir shrimp until pink and no longer translucent inside, about 5 minutes. Divide grits among 6 serving bowls and arrange cooked shrimp around the edges of the bowls. Place each bowl on a serving plate with 2 slices of bacon and 2 toast triangles. Sprinkle grits with shredded Cheddar cheese.
Heat griddle or large skillet (if electric, heat to 350 degrees F). Spray lightly with no-stick cooking spray. Combine egg, milk, oil and muffin mix in medium bowl; stir until large lumps disappear (batter will be slightly lumpy). Pour about 1/4 cup batter for each pancake onto hot griddle. Cook 1 to 2 minutes or until bubbles begin to break on surface. Turn, cook 1 to 2 minutes or until golden brown. Spoon yogurt and berries on half of each pancake. Fold over. Sprinkle with powdered sugar, if desired.
Whisk flour, 1 egg, salt, and baking powder together in a bowl; Add butter-flavored shortening into flour mixture and combine by hand until mixture resembles coarse crumbs. Stir ice water into the mixture, adding enough so the dough just holds together. Form dough into a ball, wrap in waxed paper, and refrigerate 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Generously flour a large sheet of waxed paper and roll the dough out to an even circle about 11 inches across; fit crust into a 9-inch pie dish. Press edges of dough gently over rim of crust. Bake the crust in the preheated oven until lightly browned, 6 to 7 minutes. Reduce oven heat to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Heat butter in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir mushrooms, green onions, and red bell pepper in the hot butter until vegetables soften, about 7 minutes; stir in garlic and cook a few minutes more. Season vegetables with salt and black pepper. Whisk cream, eggs, celery salt, and hot sauce together in a bowl until thoroughly combined; stir crabmeat and mushroom mixture into egg mixture. Crumble about 3/4 of the herb cheese spread into the bottom of the crust and pour crabmeat mixture over the cheese spread. Crumble remaining herb cheese spread into crabmeat filling and spread Italian cheese blend over the top. Bake in the oven until crabmeat filling is set and cheese topping is lightly golden brown, 30 to 35 minutes.
Spray a 1-quart microwave-safe casserole dish with cooking spray. Beat eggs by hand in a bowl until slightly frothy; add flour, sugar, sour cream, and salt. Beat until all ingredients are fully incorporated. Pour batter into prepared casserole dish; sprinkle blueberries over batter. Microwave on high, turning dish around every minute, until center is set, 4 to 5 minutes. Divide onto plates and sprinkle with confectioners' sugar.
Puree all ingredients in blender on high until smooth.  Serve immediately.
In large bowl stir together Simply Potatoes, carrot, onion, flour and salt. Stir in beaten eggs. Heat oil in 12-inch nonstick skillet over medium heat. Drop four generous 1/4 cup pancakes of potato mixture into skillet; flatten slightly. Cook each pancake 2 to 3 minutes on each side or until golden brown, turning once. Cook remaining pancakes, adding additional oil to skillet if needed. Drain pancakes on paper towel. Serve with applesauce or sour cream if desired.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Line 2 large rimmed baking sheets with parchment paper or aluminum foil. Stir rolled oats, oat bran, wheat germ, shredded coconut, pumpkin seeds, walnuts, pecans, sunflower seeds, and slivered almonds together in a large bowl until thoroughly combined. Mix kosher salt and cinnamon together in a saucepan, place over medium-high heat, and add vegetable oil and coconut oil. Heat until coconut oil is melted and oil mixture is hot. Stir maple syrup and honey into oil mixture until incorporated; remove from heat and stir in vanilla extract. Pour oil mixture over dry ingredients and stir thoroughly to coat. Spread granola onto prepared baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes; stir granola. Bake for 15 more minutes and stir; repeat, baking 15 minutes (45 minutes total baking time). Let granola cool, transfer to large bowl, and stir dried cranberries into granola.
Place ingredients in the pan of the bread machine in the order suggested by the manufacturer.  Select the Dough/Manual setting and Start. After the first rise, remove the bread from the bread machine. Shape into two loaves, and place into lightly greased 7x3 inch loaf pans. Allow the dough to rise until doubled in volume, but not more than an inch above the top of the pan. Bake at  350 degrees F (175 degrees C) for 35 to 40 minutes.
Melt butter in baking pan. Melt the milk in the water. Mix the ingredients with the butter in the following order:  sugar, oatmeal,  vanilla extract, eggs, flour, baking powder, cereal and milk.  Pat into a greased 9 x 13 inch pan. Bake at 325 degrees F (175 degrees C)  for 15 minutes or until golden brown.  Slice into desired sizes.
Cook, peel and mash the sugar pumpkin. Sift flour, baking powder and baking soda together.  Gradually add pumpkin, sugar and water to make a soft dough. When it just holds together, knead several minutes.  Divide dough into 4 - 6 equal parts.  Knead each portion again several minutes or until it becomes a soft, smooth ball.  Roll out each portion 1/4 inch thick.  Another method is to pinch off small pieces of dough and form into individual cakes 2 - 3 inch across. In a large iron skillet, fry in very hot vegetable oil (about 1inch in depth) until brown on one side.  Flip over and brown other side.  The bread will puff up and get crisp and chewy.  Sprinkle with granulated sugar.
In a saucepan, heat milk, water, and butter or margarine until warm. In large mixing bowl, combine 2 cups flour, yeast, 1/4 cup sugar, salt, nutmeg, mace, and cloves; mix well.   Stir in warm milk mixture and  egg.  Blend with an electric mixer at low speed until moistened; beat 3 minutes at medium speed.  By hand, stir in raisins, cherries, citron, nuts, and enough remaining flour to make a firm dough. Knead dough on a lightly floured surface until smooth and elastic, 5 to 8 minutes.  Place in a greased bowl, turning to grease top.  Cover.   Let rise in warm place until doubled, about 1 hour. Punch dough down.  Shape into a round loaf, and place in a greased 2 quart casserole.  Cover, and let rise in warm place until doubled, about 1 hour.  Brush top of loaf with melted butter, and sprinkle lightly with 1 teaspoon sugar. Bake at 375 degrees F ( 190 degrees C) for 40 to 45 minutes, until deep golden brown.  If too dark, cover loosely with foil last 5 to 10 minutes of baking.  Cool.
Bring olive oil, 1 tablespoon vinegar, and water to boil in a large pot. Place artichoke hearts in the mixture, and boil 30 minutes, or until tender; drain. Prepare Hollandaise Sauce according to recipe directions. Fill a large saucepan with 3 inches of water. Bring water to a gentle simmer, and add remaining vinegar. Carefully break eggs into simmering water, and allow to cook for 3 to 5 minutes. Yolks should still be soft in center. Remove eggs from water with a slotted spoon and set on a warm plate. Place artichoke hearts on a serving platter. Place a poached egg on top of each artichoke heart. Cover with hollandaise sauce. Sprinkle olives on top of sauce.  Sprinkle chives around platter.
In a large bowl, combine cereal, brown sugar, shortening and salt. Pour boiling mixture over mixture. Let cool to room temperature. In a small bowl, dissolve yeast in warm water. Let stand until creamy, about 10 minutes. Combine cereal and yeast mixtures. Add eggs and two cups flour; mix well. Stir in the remaining flour, 1/2 cup at a time, beating well after each addition. When the dough has pulled together, turn it out onto a lightly floured surface and knead until smooth and elastic, about 8 minutes. Lightly oil a large bowl, place the dough in the bowl and turn to coat with oil. Cover with a damp cloth and let rise in a warm place until doubled in volume, about 1 hour. Deflate the dough and turn it out onto a lightly floured surface. Divide the dough into two equal pieces and form into loaves. Place the loaves into two lightly greased 9x5 inch loaf pans. Cover the loaves with a damp cloth and let rise until doubled in volume, about 40 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in preheated oven until brown, about 30 minutes. Remove from pans and let cool on a wire rack.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13 inch baking dish. Whisk together the eggs and milk in a large bowl. Stir in the ranch-style beans, corn and Cheddar cheese. Season with cumin, paprika, oregano, salt, pepper and hot sauce, and mix well. Add the bread cubes to the mixture and stir to distribute the cheese and beans. Allow to set for about 20 minutes, until the bread has absorbed the liquid. Stir occasionally, and add more milk if necessary to make the bread moist, but not soggy. Pour into the prepared baking dish, and spread evenly. Bake uncovered for 45 minutes in the preheated oven, until lightly browned and a knife inserted into the center comes out clean. Let stand a few minutes before slicing and serving.
In a saucepan, bring 2 1/2 cups of water to a boil. In a small bowl, stir together the remaining water and cornmeal. When the water boils, gradually add the cornmeal mixture so that the water stays at a boil. Cook, stirring frequently to prevent lumps, for 30 to 40 minutes. Mix in the maple syrup and cinnamon, adjusting to taste if desired. Spoon into bowls to serve and top with cottage cheese and grape jelly.
Place the softened ice cream into a punch bowl. Pour in lemonade and champagne. Stir briefly then serve.
In a large bowl, stir together the scalded milk, sugar, margarine and salt.  In a small bowl, stir together the yeast and warm water. Let stand 10 minutes, or until foamy. Stir the yeast mixture into the milk mixture. Blend in the eggs.  Mix in the flour one cup at a time to make a soft dough. Cover bowl and let rise in a warm place until double. Heat one inch of oil in a deep heavy skillet to 370 degrees F (180 degrees C). Form large handfuls of dough into flat pancake shapes and fry them in the hot oil, turning once, until golden brown on both sides. Remove from oil to drain on paper towels.
Thaw the salmon slightly in cold water, and remove the skin. Use a very sharp knife to slice the fillet into thin slices. Place the slices in a bowl, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Toss with enough liquid smoke to coat the fish, and refrigerate for 30 minutes. Heat the butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Fry the salmon slices for a few minutes turning once. Fish should flake easily with a fork when done.
In a medium bowl, stir together the flour, salt and sugar. Cut in margarine until the mixture resembles breadcrumbs. Stir in just enough water to hold together. Roll out on a lightly floured surface to 1/8 inch thick. Use dough to line 4 tartlet pans. Prick with a fork, and refrigerate until needed. Heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add watercress, garlic and onions. Cook and stir for about 2 minutes, or until fragrant. Remove from the heat and stir in the Parmesan cheese, yogurt and cayenne pepper. Spoon into the chilled tart pans. Bake for 20 minutes in the preheated oven, or until filling is firm. Serve warm.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Stir in the onion, and cook until softened and translucent, then stir in mushrooms. Cook for an additional 3 minutes. Pour in red wine, and simmer until the liquid has nearly evaporated. Whisk together eggs, sour cream, red pepper flakes, and salt until smooth; stir in cheese.  Place shrimp into the pie shell in an even layer, sprinkle mushroom mixture over top, then pour in custard and spread evenly. Bake in preheated oven for 50 minutes until set. Allow to cool for 10 minutes before serving.
Juice the mango, limes, and apples in a juice machine.  Serve over ice.
Juice the pineapple, strawberries, and blueberries together in a juice machine.  Pour the juice into a blender along with the ice cubes.  Puree until smooth.
Preheat an oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Place the tart shells into muffin pans and set aside. Cook the bacon in a large, deep skillet over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain on a paper towel-lined plate; crumble once cool. Beat the eggs in a mixing bowl; whisk in the cream, flour, garlic salt, onion powder, chili powder, and cumin until smooth. Stir in the crumbled bacon, 2 cups Cheddar cheese, green bell pepper, red bell pepper, ham, and salsa. Ladle the mixture into the tart shells; sprinkle with 1/2 cup of Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center of the quiche comes out clean, 20 to 25 minutes.
Pour the orange juice and rum into a blender. Mix in the egg and pulse until smooth. Add the ice cubes and blend. Divide the mixture between two tall glasses and garnish each drink with orange slices and maraschino cherries.
In a large bowl, beat together the eggs and beer. Sift together the flour and salt, and mix in. Beat in oil. Allow to stand for 1 hour. If batter is too thick, stir in a little milk. Heat a crepe pan over medium heat, and lightly coat with cooking spray. Pour on 2 tablespoons batter, and quickly spread to the edges of pan. Cook until top appears dry, then turn, and cook for 15 seconds. Set aside on paper towels and repeat cooking method until all batter is used.
Beat eggs, soy milk, and olive oil together in a small bowl. Mix all-purpose flour, whole-wheat flour, flax seeds, salt, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a separate bowl. Stir the egg mixture into flour mixture until well mixed. Heat a lightly oiled skillet over medium heat. Pour about 1/4 the batter in the hot skillet and cook until batter turns from wet to moist, and the edges begin to curl away from the sides of the skillet, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and continue cooking until lightly golden on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes. Place cooked crepe onto a plate, and cover with a kitchen towel to keep moist. Repeat with the remaining batter, lightly oiling the skillet as needed to keep the crepes from sticking.
In a large saucepan, stir together the cream of mushroom soup, sliced eggs, mixed vegetables, milk, salt and pepper. Bring to a simmer over medium heat, and cook until vegetables are heated through. To serve, place toast onto plates, and spoon the sauce over it.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 9 inch cast-iron skillet, and place it in the oven while it preheats. In a medium bowl, mix together the eggs, cheese, corn and jalapeno peppers. Stir in the croutons until well coated. Pour into the prepared pan. Bake for 30 minutes in the preheated oven, or until the top is golden brown. Cut in to wedges or squares to serve.
Preheat oven to 350 F. Begin by mixing the eggs and heavy cream in a bowl with the salt & pepper. In a separate bowl place the sausage, jalapeno pepper, cheese, garlic and cumin. Now place a third of the amount of egg mixture in the bottom of a 2 quart baking dish. Next, place a slice of bread into the dish. Place 1/3 of the amount of sausage mixture from step 2 onto the slice of bread. Repeat steps 3 to 4 until last slice of bread is on top. Add the remaining 1/3 of sausage ingredients evenly across the top slice of bread. Bake in oven for 15 minutes.
In a large frying pan, heat the oil over medium high heat. Add the asparagus, carrots and spaghetti sauce; cook on medium high heat until vegetables are soft. You may add a little water if necessary. Push the vegetables to the side of the pan to create four spaces for the eggs.  Crack eggs directly into the holes, being careful not to break the yolk.  Cook until eggs are done, but the yolk is still soft.  Season with salt and pepper to taste. Remove from heat and serve immediately.
Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil.  Add potatoes and cook until tender but still firm, about 15 minutes. Drain and cool. Mash potatoes and bread cubes together in a large bowl. Mix in egg, salt, cayenne, jalapeno, and cilantro. Shape potato mixture into patties and coat with bread crumbs. Heat oil in a large tall-sided skillet until almost smoking. Carefully slide cutlets into oil. Cook, turning once, until golden brown on both sides. Remove from heat and drain. Serve warm.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C).  Grease and flour four 16 ounce fruit or vegetable cans. In a large bowl, sift together flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, cinnamon, and salt.  Combine the eggs, oil, and milk; add to the sifted ingredients, and mix until just combined.  Stir in carrots, coconut, cherries, raisins, and pecans. Bake for 45 to 50 minutes.  Remove from cans, and cool thoroughly.  Wrap in plastic wrap or foil, and refrigerate to store.
Place collards, onion and salt pork in a large saucepan. Cover with water and cook over medium heat, until greens are tender (about 15 to 20 minutes). Drain, discard pork, reserve the greens and onions and set aside. Spray a nonstick skillet with cooking spray. Heat skillet over medium high heat and add egg whites. Season with salt and pepper to taste and saute all together, stirring constantly until done to taste. Meanwhile, spray another nonstick skillet with cooking spray and heat over medium high heat. Saute Canadian bacon on both sides until lightly browned. Remove from skillet and drain on paper towels. To Assemble Stacks: Place bread slices on a broiler pan. Top each with 1 slice Canadian bacon and equal portions greens, egg whites and cheese. Broil until cheese bubbles and melts. Sprinkle chives on top and serve.
Combine flour, oatmeal and baking powder in medium bowl. Whisk soymilk, eggs, brown sugar and soybean oil in large bowl until blended. Add flour mixture to soymilk mixture; stir just until blended. Stir in 2 cups berries. Heat large skillet over medium heat; brush lightly with soybean oil. Pour 1/4 cup batter into hot skillet; cook until bubbles begin to burst. Turn and continue cooking for 1 to 2 minutes or until golden. Repeat with remaining batter. Serve with remaining berries and maple syrup, if desired.
Stir 2 cups water, milk, and oats together in a large saucepan; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low and cook oats at a simmer until softened and beginning to thicken, about 15 minutes. Stir 1 cup water, mashed banana, flax seed, cocoa powder, cinnamon, and nutmeg through the oats; continue cooking at a simmer until thick, about 10 minutes. Fold walnuts into the oatmeal.
Prepare shortcrust pastry base in pan. Gently fry leek and bacon in butter until leek softens. Whisk eggs, Maille(R) Dijon Originale mustard and cream together. Add the leek, bacon and cheese. Season and pour into pastry base. Bake at 320 degrees F for 20-25 minutes or until set. Serve warm.
Stir tomato juice, vodka, lemon juice, Worcestershire sauce, horseradish, hot pepper sauce, celery salt, and black pepper together in a pitcher.
Bring milk to boil in a small pot over medium-high. Stir oats, brown sugar, white sugar, cinnamon, pumpkin pie spice, and salt into the boiling milk. Place a cover on the pot, reduce heat to medium-low, and cook, stirring occasionally, for 3 minutes. Stir pumpkin puree into oat mixture until smooth; cook and stir continually another 2 minutes. Remove from heat; let oatmeal set 2 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Beat eggs in a large bowl with a fork until slightly frothy. Mix in sour cream and Mexican seasoning. Add salsa, tomato, onion, and cilantro. Pour into the prepared baking dish. Sprinkle 3/4 cup Mexican cheese blend on top; stir in gently with a fork. Bake in the preheated oven until firm and springs back when gently pressed, about 20 minutes. Sprinkle remaining 3/4 cup Mexican cheese blend and jalapeno on top. Continue baking until cheese bubbles and turns golden, 5 to 10 minutes. Let frittata stand for 10 minutes before slicing with a serrated knife.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish with coconut oil. Stir rolled oats, almonds, walnuts, sunflower seeds, and coconut together onto a large baking sheet; spread the oat mixture out on a baking sheet. Toast in the preheated oven until golden brown, 8 to 10 minutes, stirring after 5 minutes. Pour the oat mixture into a large bowl and mix in cinnamon. Stir raisins, turbinado sugar, agave nectar, coconut butter, peanut butter, and sea salt together in a saucepan. Place saucepan over medium-low heat, bring the mixture to a boil, and boil for 1 minute. Remove the mixture from the heat and stir in vanilla extract. Pour the hot mixture over the oat mixture and stir until the dry ingredients are moistened. Press the mixture into the prepared baking dish until even and densely packed. Refrigerate for 1 hour to set up. Turn the mixture out of the pan, cut into 16 bars, and wrap bars in waxed paper. If desired, cut bars in half to make 32 snack-size bars.
Combine eggs, milk, and 2 tablespoons butter in a blender. Add buckwheat flour, all-purpose flour, and a pinch of salt; puree until smooth. Allow batter to rest in the refrigerator overnight. Melt 3 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Stir in cremini mushrooms and cook until golden brown, about 10 minutes. Add tomatoes and spinach; cook and stir until wilted, 3 to 4 minutes. Set the filling aside. Melt 1 teaspoon butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Pour about 1/4 cup batter per crepe (depending on the size of your pan) into the hot skillet and immediately tilt and swirl the pan to evenly distribute batter along the bottom. Cook until the center is set and edges begin to brown, 3 to 4 minutes. Sprinkle 1/4 of the filling in the middle of each crepe and sprinkle each with 3 tablespoons Gruyere cheese. Reserve remaining cheese. Fold the crepes in thirds over the filling, forming triangle shapes. Serve crepes with remaining Gruyere sprinkled on top.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Grease 4 loaf pans, 7x3-inch size. Combine 1 tablespoon white sugar with 2 teaspoons cinnamon in a small bowl. Dust the insides of the greased loaf pans with the cinnamon sugar. Stir whole wheat flour, oats, all-purpose flour, baking soda, 1 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon, and salt in a bowl. Beat 2 cups brown sugar with 3/4 cup butter in a separate mixing bowl until creamy. Beat in sour cream, bananas, eggs, and vanilla extract until smooth. Stir the dry ingredients into the banana mixture and fold in 2 cups dates, 1 cup walnuts, and 1/2 cup toasted coconut. Spoon the batter into the prepared loaf pans. Sprinkle tops of each loaf with about 1 tablespoon of dark brown sugar and 1 1/2 teaspoons each of dates, walnuts, and coconut. Brush each loaf with melted butter for a shiny glaze. Bake loaves in the preheated oven until browned and a toothpick inserted into the center of a loaf comes out clean,  about 1 hour.
Place the eggs into a saucepan in a single layer and fill with water to cover by 1 inch. Cover the saucepan and bring the water to a boil; remove from the heat and let the eggs stand in the hot water for 15 minutes; drain. Run cold water over the eggs to cool completely; peel. Cut 4 slits into each of the eggs. Roast the fennel seeds, cumin seeds, and peppercorns in a small skillet over medium heat until very fragrant; grind into powder. Set aside. Heat the oil in a large skillet or kadhai over medium heat. Stir the turmeric into the oil. Quickly fry the eggs in the hot oil on all sides, about 2 minutes. Remove and set aside. Cook the onions in the hot oil until golden brown; add the ginger, garlic, and tomatoes and continue cooking until the tomatoes are soft. Stir the ground seed mixture, ground red pepper, and ground coriander into the onion mixture and cook another 1 to 2 minutes. Pour the water into the skillet. Add the coconut, jaggery, tamarind, and salt; return to a boil and cook until the mixture thickens, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to medium-low; add the eggs and allow to simmer another 10 minutes.  If the gravy is too thick, thin out with a little water. Garnish with the cilantro leaves to serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Butter a 9x13-inch baking dish. Beat butter with 1/3 cup sugar in a mixing bowl with an electric mixer until light and fluffy. In a separate bowl, stir together flour, baking powder, salt, and 1 teaspoon cinnamon until well combined. In a third bowl, beat 8 ounces of cottage cheese with 1/4 cup sour cream, 5 eggs, 1 1/2 teaspoons of vanilla extract, and the heavy cream until the mixture is smooth. Alternate adding flour mixture and cottage cheese mixture with the creamed sugar and butter to make a fluffy batter. To make the filling, beat the cream cheese in a bowl with an electric mixer on high speed until fluffy, and add 16 ounce container of cottage cheese, 1/3 cup sugar, 2 eggs, 1/4 cup of sour cream, and 1 1/2 teaspoons of vanilla extract. Reduce mixer speed to medium, and beat until very smooth and creamy, about 5 minutes. Place half the batter into the bottom of the prepared baking dish, and spread the filling over it in an even layer. Spread the rest of the batter over the cheese layer. Bake in the preheated oven until the top is golden brown and a toothpick inserted into the center of the dish comes out clean, 50 minutes to 1 hour. Turn off the oven, open the door, and let the casserole cool in the oven for about 5 minutes before removing. Make a sauce by whisking together the orange juice, cornstarch, water, 1/8 teaspoon of cinnamon, and 1/2 cup of sugar in a saucepan over medium-low heat until the mixture boils. Stir in the strawberries, cover, reduce heat, and let the sauce simmer, stirring occasionally, until the strawberries are cooked and the sauce has thickened, about 15 minutes. Spoon sauce over casserole to serve.
Whisk the eggs with the salt and pepper, reserve. Heat a large, nonstick skillet over medium heat. Add the onion and bacon. Cook, stirring, for 5 minutes or until onions and bacon are browned. Pour in the eggs. Cook, without stirring for 1 minute. Cook, stirring, for 1 to 2 minutes or until just set. Remove from the heat. Use a small knife to cut halfway around the outside edge of each pita, fold back the top flap. Spread an equal amount of the ketchup all over the inside of each pita. Lay a portion of spinach over the ketchup. Top with a portion of the scrambled egg mixture, sprinkle with cheese. Tuck the top flap of each pita inside, directly over the filling. Tightly roll the loose flap over the outside of each pita to completely enclose filling. Let stand for 5 minutes to soften cheese before serving.
Place the banana, honeydew melon, blackberries, wheat germ, and almond milk into a blender. Cover, and puree until smooth. Divide ice cubes into two tall glasses, and pour the smoothie over the ice.
Preheat an oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place the chayote into a large pot and cover with salted water. Bring to a boil over high heat, then reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until tender, about 15 minutes. Drain and chop the chayote. Set aside. Heat the butter in a skillet over medium heat. Stir in the onion; cook and stir until the onion has softened and turned translucent, about 5 minutes. Stir in the chopped chayote, and season with salt and pepper. Break the eggs over the chayote mixture, and reduce heat to low. Cook and stir until the eggs have set, 3 to 4 minutes. Transfer the mixture to a baking dish and top with American cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until the cheese has melted, about 5 minutes.
Blend zucchini, carrot, yogurt, milk, oats, honey, and flax seeds in a blender until smooth.
Blend banana, cucumber, buttermilk, coconut water, and blueberry preserves together in a blender until smooth.
Blend coconut milk, aloe vera juice, almond butter, and honey together in a blender until smooth; add strawberries and mango and blend on high until smooth.
Blend yogurt, strawberries, tofu, banana, milk, and sugar together in a blender until desired consistency is reached.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Spray an 8-inch square baking dish with cooking spray. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion, red bell pepper, mushrooms, and asparagus until onion is translucent, 5 to 10 minutes. Spread onion mixture into the prepared baking dish. Beat egg whites, eggs, and skim milk together in a bowl until smooth; pour over onion mixture. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese over egg mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until frittata is set in the middle and a fork inserted in the middle comes out clean, 20 to 25 minutes.
Blend yogurt, almond milk, spinach, blueberries, grapeseed oil, chia seeds, flax seed, and almonds together in a blender until smooth.
Beat milk, eggs, flour, sugar, and vanilla extract together in a large mixing bowl until the batter is thin and without lumps. Heat a large skillet over medium heat and grease with 1 tablespoon canola oil. Ladle enough batter into the skillet to cover the cooking surface in a thin layer. Cook until bubbles appear on the surface, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip with a large turner and cook until browned on the other side, about 2 minutes more. Remove cooked palacinky to a plate and roll into a log.
Preheat and lightly grease a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Whisk brown rice flour, teff flour, walnuts, rice flour, brown sugar, baking soda, and baking powder together in a bowl. Beat milk, bananas, eggs, yogurt, oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Stir flour mixture into banana mixture until batter is just mixed. Pour 1/4 to 1/2 cup batter into the preheated waffle iron; cook according to manufacturer's instructions until golden brown, 5 to 10 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Roll each prosciutto slice into a cylinder and cut into 3/4-inch segments; put into a saucepan. Stir onion, tomato, and Pinot Grigio with the prosciutto; cook over medium-high heat until most of the wine has evaporated, about 10 minutes. Heat olive oil in a small skillet or omelet pan over medium heat. Beat egg and egg whites together in a small bowl; pour into the hot skillet and tilt the skillet around so the egg covers the cooking surface completely. Cook egg undisturbed until no longer wet on top, about 5 minutes. Pour the prosciutto mixture over one half of the egg; top with Cheddar cheese. Lift the opposing half of the egg with a spatula and fold over the filling. Continue to cook until the cheese melts, about 2 minutes more.
Mix oats, walnuts, brown sugar, flax, chia seeds, sesame seeds, cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt together in a bowl. Pour boiling water over the oats mixture and stir so ingredients are completely moistened; steep until the oats are softened, about 2 minutes. Stir blueberries through the oats mixture.
Blend fresh pineapple, dates, and vanilla extract together in a Vitamix(R) or blender until smooth, about 90 seconds. Add blackberries and blend, about 90 seconds. Add kale and blend, about 90 seconds; repeat for 90 seconds more. Add frozen pineapple and blend until smooth, about 90 seconds.
Pulse carrot and mango together in a blender until roughly chopped. Add peach, soy milk, cinnamon, allspice, and ginger; blend until smooth.
Melt 1 1/2 teaspoons butter in a skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir potatoes in hot butter until tender, 10 to 15 minutes. Transfer potatoes to a bowl. Melt remaining butter in the same skillet over medium-high heat. Saute onion in hot butter until onion is soft and translucent, 5 to 10 minutes. Transfer onion to a bowl. Beat eggs, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Reduce heat under skillet to medium. Cook and stir eggs in hot skillet until set, 3 to 5 minutes; transfer to a plate. Spread tortillas out onto a work surface. Spoon potatoes, onion, eggs, bacon, Cheddar cheese, avocado, salsa, and sour cream in a line across the middle of a tortilla. Fold opposing edges of each tortilla to overlap the filling. Roll 1 of the opposing edges around the filling into a burrito.
Put romaine lettuce into the bottom of a blender pitcher; add enough milk to cover completely and blend on High until smooth. Drop one strawberry at a time into the blender while still running on High and allow the berry to blend completely before adding the next. Blend one banana chunk at a time into the mixture in the same manner as the strawberries. Thin the smoothie with additional milk to keep smoothie blending properly. Blend vanilla extract into the smoothie.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a 9x11-inch baking dish with aluminum foil. Whisk oats, flour, chocolate chips, ground cashews, sunflower seeds, flax meal, wheat germ, cinnamon, and sea salt together in a large shallow bowl. Stir warmed honey, almond butter, and vanilla extract together in a bowl until well-mixed. Pour honey mixture into oat mixture; stir until batter is well-combined. Turn batter out into prepared baking dish. Lay a sheet of waxed paper over batter and press firmly to evenly distribute in the baking dish. Remove and discard waxed paper. Bake in the preheated oven until golden and fragrant, about 12 minutes. Pull aluminum foil from baking dish and cool bars in the aluminum foil for 10 minutes; remove and discard aluminum foil. Cut into bars.
Blend kale, soy milk, spinach, banana, raspberries, and pineapple together in a blender until smooth.
Blend flour, apples, almond milk, coconut oil, water, baking powder, cane sugar, nutmeg, and cinnamon in a blender until smooth. Heat a non-stick griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Stir white sugar and 1 tablespoon brown sugar together in a small bowl. Stir flour, cinnamon, pumpkin pie spice, and salt together in a separate bowl with a whisk. Put butter in an 8-inch cake pan and melt in preheated oven, 3 to 5 minutes. Sprinkle remaining brown sugar over the melted butter in the cake pan. Beat eggs, milk, vanilla extract, and almond extract together in a larger bowl with an electric mixer; stir into the flour mixture until you have a smooth batter. Pour the batter over the butter and brown sugar in the cake pan. Sprinkle white and brown sugar mixture over the batter. Bake in the preheated oven until puffed and golden, 20 to 25 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease or line muffin cups with paper liners, adding extra grease to the bottoms of the cups. Cook chicken broth and quinoa together in a rice cooker or bring to a boil in a saucepan. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until quinoa is tender and water is absorbed, 15 to 20 minutes. Mix quinoa, spinach, Colby-Jack cheese, eggs, bacon bits, onion powder, garlic, Worcestershire sauce, salt, and white pepper together in a bowl; spoon into the prepared muffin cups. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, about 25 minutes.
Bring water to boil in a saucepan. Add oat bran and salt, reduce heat to medium-low; cook and stir until mixture begins to simmer, about 5 minutes. Stir pumpkin puree, ginger, and cinnamon into oat bran mixture; bring back to a simmer. Stir in sugar and coconut milk; cook and stir until mixture reaches desired consistency.
Blend banana, yogurt, almond milk, ice, pumpkin puree, and pumpkin pie spice together in a blender until smooth.
Blend banana, coconut juice blend, pineapple, ice, and agave nectar together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a baking sheet. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until cooked through, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Spread pizza crust dough onto the prepared baking sheet; top with a layer of nacho cheese sauce. Layer hash brown potatoes evenly over the nacho cheese layer. Sprinkle chorizo over potatoes. Beat eggs, salsa, and taco seasoning together in a bowl using a whisk until smooth. Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir egg mixture until eggs are set and scrambled, 5 to 7 minutes. Transfer scrambled eggs to a plate; allow to cool until easily handled. Sprinkle scrambled eggs over chorizo layer and top with Mexican cheese blend. Bake in the preheated oven until crust is golden brown and cheese is melted and bubbling, 15 to 20 minutes.
Mix baking mix, brown sugar, and pumpkin pie spice together in a large bowl. Beat milk, mashed sweet potatoes, white vinegar, and 2 tablespoons vegetable oil together in a separate bowl until smooth; gradually beat into the dry mixture to incorporate into a batter. Heat a large skillet over medium heat; add just enough oil to cover the cooking surface and let oil get hot. Pour batter onto hot skillet by 1/4 cup portion, taking care to not overcrowd the skillet. Cook pancakes until browned, 3 to 5 minutes per side. Repeat cooking steps until all batter is used.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 9x5-inch loaf pans. Mix flour, cinnamon, salt, baking soda, baking powder, nutmeg, and allspice together in a bowl. Beat sugar, applesauce, and eggs together in a separate bowl; mix into the flour mixture until batter is just combined. Fold zucchini and carrots into batter. Divide batter between the prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of the loaves comes out clean, about 1 hour.
Heat oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Beat eggs and cream together in a bowl. Stir garlic, Cheddar cheese, curry powder, and cumin into egg mixture. Cook and stir egg mixture in the hot oil until eggs are set and scrambled, about 5 minutes.
Stir water, quinoa, sage, and basil leaf together in a saucepan; bring water to a boil, cover saucepan with a lid, reduce heat to low, and cook until the water is absorbed and the quinoa is tender, about 15 minutes. Remove basil leaf from quinoa mixture and discard. Stir asparagus, goat cheese, and chia seeds into the quinoa mixture; replace lid on saucepan and let the mixture steam until the goat cheese melts and the asparagus softens slightly, about 5 minutes.
For the crust: Preheat oven to 450 degrees F. Mix veggies and hash browns together. Gently press between paper towels to remove as much moisture as possible. In a large nine inch pie plate, toss the veggie mixture with the melted butter. Sprinkle 4 tablespoons of the cheese packet from the box of Steakhouse Hash Browns over hash brown mixture and blend. Using the bottom of a measuring cup, press mixture into the bottom and up the sides to firmly form a crust. Place rack on the lower third of the oven. Bake for 20-25 minutes until golden brown and the edges begin to crisp. While crust bakes, make the filling. For the filling: Blend the eggs and cream until smooth. Stir in the artichokes, leeks, ham, cheese and seasonings. When the hash brown crust is ready, lower the oven temperature to 350 degrees F and pour the filling into the crust. Bake for 30 minutes then sprinkle the crunchy onion topping on the quiche. Continue to bake for another 15 minutes or until the quiche is light golden brown and firm in the middle. Quiche will settle as it cools.
Place apples in a bowl and drizzle with lemon juice to keep from browning. Melt 1/2 cup butter in a large saucepan over medium heat; remove from heat. Stir flour into melted butter until smooth. Return saucepan to low heat; stir in brown sugar, white sugar, and water until sugars dissolve and mixture is smooth, 3 to 5 minutes. Increase heat to medium; cook and stir mixture until boiling. Reduce heat to low and add apples. Simmer mixture until apples are cooked but slightly tender, 20 to 25 minutes. Preheat griddle to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Whisk eggs, milk, cinnamon, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Dip bread slices into egg mixture until completely coated. Grease heated griddle with frozen butter. Cook dipped bread slices on the hot buttered griddle until browned, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Repeat with remaining frozen butter and dipped bread. Serve French toast with apple mixture ladled over top.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch deep-dish pie dish. Run beet, carrots, cucumber, celery, spinach, and garlic through juicer according to manufacturer's instructions. Transfer pulp to a bowl and mix in onion. Whisk yogurt, mozzarella cheese, feta cheese, egg whites, and egg together in a separate bowl. Fold pulp mixture and chicken into egg mixture; pour into the prepared pie dish. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted in the center of the quiche comes out clean, 30 to 40 minutes.
Heat 1 tablespoon butter in a skillet over medium-low heat; saute plantains until golden brown, about 5 minutes per side. Transfer plantains to a paper towel-lined plate using a slotted spoon. Beat egg in a large bowl until fluffy. Stir milk and margarine into egg; add flour, sugar, baking powder, vanilla extract, and salt. Stir mixture until batter is smooth. Fold plantains into batter. Melt 1 teaspoon butter in a heavy griddle or frying pan over medium heat. Griddle is ready with a drop of water breaks into several smaller balls that dance around griddle. Pour batter, about 1/4 cup per pancake, into hot griddle. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip pancakes and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Heat olive oil in a 10-inch skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir broccoli, bell pepper, and sweet onion in hot oil until hot, about 3 minutes. Place a cover on the skillet and continue cooking until the vegetables begin to soften, about 5 minutes more. Stir olives into the vegetable mixture. Beat eggs, egg whites, milk, salt, and pepper together with a whisk in a small bowl; pour over the vegetable mixture in the skillet. Sprinkle feta cheese over the egg mixture. Replace cover on the skillet, reduce heat to medium-low, and cook until the egg is lightly browned on the bottom, 3 to 5 minutes. Carefully flip the frittata and cook until the bottom is again lightly browned, 1 to 2 minutes more.
Blend blueberries, water, mint leaves, avocado, orange juice, and lemon juice in a blender until smooth.
Blend mango, carrots, banana, yellow bell pepper, red bell pepper, mineral water, lemon juice, honey, or chia seeds in a blender until smooth. Add more water for a thinner consistency.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease an 8-inch square baking dish. Beat eggs together in a large bowl. Stir milk into eggs. Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat; saute onion until softened, 5 to 10 minutes. Add ham; cook and stir until ham is warmed, 2 to 3 minutes. Transfer onion-ham mixture to the prepared baking dish. Layer provolone cheese over onion-ham mixture. Pour egg mixture over cheese; season with salt and pepper. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, about 45 to 50 minutes.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease a loaf pan. Stir 1 1/2 cups sugar, applesauce, oil, and eggs together in a bowl; add lemon peel and 1 teaspoon lemon extract. Pour milk into applesauce mixture and stir. Whisk flour, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Add flour mixture to applesauce mixture; stir until well-combined. Pour batter into prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until toothpick inserted in the center of the loaf comes out clean, about 75 minutes. Let bread rest in the pan for 10 minutes before removing to a wire rack to cool. Whisk 1/2 cup sugar, water, and 1/2 teaspoon lemon extract together in a saucepan over medium heat until sugar is melted and has a thick glaze consistency, 1 to 2 minutes. Poke several holes in the top of the warm bread and brush glaze over loaf.
Melt coconut oil in a skillet over medium heat; add tomato, onion, garlic, and scotch bonnet chile pepper. Cook and stir tomato mixture until onion is almost translucent, about 5 minutes. Pour sardines and soybean oil into tomato-onion mixture; mash fish with a fork until incorporated. Cover skillet, reduce to low, and cook until sardines are heated through, about 3 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. Serve sardine mixture over rice.
Preheat waffle iron according to manufacturer instructions. Stir brown rice flour, sorghum flour, dark cocoa powder, baking powder, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Whisk zucchini, soy milk, eggs, water, oil, and honey together in a separate bowl; add flour mixture and whisk together until evenly moistened. Prepare the surfaces of the waffle iron with cooking spray. Ladle 1 cup of the batter into the waffle iron, close lid, and cook until you have a crispy brown waffle, about 5 minutes. Repeat, applying more cooking spray between waffles, until all batter is used.
Combine ice cubes, strawberries, kefir, mint leaves, vanilla syrup, and orange juice together respectively in a blender and blend until smooth.
Mix aloe vera juice and oats together in a bowl; set aside until oats have absorbed the liquid, about 10 minutes. Blend oat mixture, spinach, kale, chard, banana, cucumber, blueberries, protein powder, cinnamon, and cayenne pepper together in a blender until smooth, about 2 minutes.
Whisk flour, sugar, baking powder, cinnamon, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk almond milk, applesauce, eggs, and almond extract together in a separate bowl. Add flour mixture to almond milk mixture and stir until batter is just moistened. Stir granola and almonds into batter. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 275 degrees F (135 degrees C). Line baking sheets with parchment paper. Mix rolled oats, flax seed meal, steel-cut oats, oat bran, wheat germ, and pecans in a large bowl. Whisk agave nectar, pumpkin, brown sugar, water, canola oil, vanilla extract, pumpkin pie spice, and sea salt in a separate bowl, stirring until brown sugar and salt are dissolved. Pour liquid ingredients over rolled oats mixture and stir to coat. Spread mixture on prepared baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven for 1 hour, stirring every 20 minutes. Stir dates into granola and continue baking until granola is lightly golden brown, 20 to 30 more minutes, stirring once. Let cool completely and mix miniature chocolate chips into granola. Store in an airtight container.
Heat a skillet over medium heat. Cook eggs in hot skillet, stirring vigorously, until they are beginning to solidify, 1 to 2 minutes. Stir hot dog slices and hash browns to eggs; cook and stir until the potatoes are browned and the eggs completely cooked, 3 to 5 minutes. Top with ketchup to serve.
Mix rice flour and salt together in a bowl; form a well in the center of the mixture. Stir in egg, vegetable oil, and enough water to make a smooth batter. Spray a non-stick frying pan with cooking spray and place over medium heat; pour about 1/4 cup batter into the hot pan. Tilt pan until batter covers the whole bottom surface making a thin pancake; cook for 1 minute. Flip and cook about 1 more minute. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend orange juice, yogurt, oranges, and cinnamon together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8x4-inch loaf pan. Spread walnuts onto a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until toasted and fragrant, 5 to 10 minutes. Set aside to cool. Mix dates, figs, butter, and baking soda together in a bowl. Pour boiling water over the date mixture. Let sit for figs to slightly rehydrate, 15 to 20 minutes. Stir sugar, walnuts, and eggs into date mixture. Whisk all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, salt, and baking soda together in a separate bowl. Stir flour mixture into date mixture until batter is just combined. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 55 to 65 minutes. Cool in the pan for 10 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Scoop out a little of the avocado from where the pit was to make room for 1 egg. Place on a baking sheet and crack 1 egg on top of each avocado half. Bake in the preheated oven until egg is cooked, 15 to 20 minutes. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese on top and season with salt and pepper. Garnish with fresh parsley.
Puree all ingredients in a blender until smooth.
Heat 1 tablespoon olive oil in a saute pan over medium-high heat. Add onion and jalapeno. Cook, stirring occasionally, until onion appears translucent, about 4 minutes. Add tomato and garlic; cook and stir for 1 minute. Add salsa and scrape any browned bits off the bottom of the pan. Season with cumin, salt, and pepper. Reduce heat and simmer for 2 minutes. Add tortilla chips to the pan and stir until coated with sauce. Heat remaining oil in a separate pan over medium-high heat. Whisk eggs together and pour into the hot pan; cook until starting to set, about 2 minutes. Scrape cooked egg off the edges and fold into the center. Cook until eggs are halfway cooked but still runny, 2 to 3 minutes more. Fold into the tortilla chip mixture. Keep stirring to finish scrambling the eggs, about 2 minutes. Add Cotija cheese and turn off heat. Divide egg mixture onto plates. Garnish with avocado, cilantro, and sour cream.
Heat olive oil and butter in a 9-inch nonstick pan over medium heat and cook asparagus, stirring occasionally, until soft but still firm to the bite, 10 to 15 minutes. Beat eggs in a bowl until frothy. Stir in Parmesan cheese and milk; season with salt and pepper. Pour egg mixture over asparagus and cook until eggs are set, 10 to 15 minutes. Invert frittata onto a plate and garnish with parsley.
In a large skillet, heat butter over medium heat. Add onion, red pepper, and garlic. Cook and stir 6 to 8 minutes or until just browned. In a very large bowl, combine onion mixture, bread cubes, sausage, 2 1/2 cups cheese, and parsley. Transfer mixture to a greased 3-quart rectangular baking dish. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, half-and-half, salt, and black pepper. Pour evenly over the bread mixture. Press lightly with the back of a large spoon to moisten all of the ingredients. Cover with foil. Chill 4 to 24 hours. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Bake, covered, for 30 minutes. Uncover and bake 30 to 35 minutes more. Remove from oven. Sprinkle with remaining 1/2 cup cheese. Let stand 15 minutes; serve warm. Garnish with chives, if desired.
Heat a cast iron skillet over medium-low heat and grease with butter. Whisk eggs, yogurt, water, coconut flour, coconut oil, flaxseed meal, vanilla extract, baking powder, cinnamon, salt, and stevia together in a large bowl. Drop batter into the hot skillet using a 1/3 cup measuring cup. Cook until bubbles form and the pancakes are firm enough to flip, 4 to 5 minutes. Be sure to cook them on low enough heat that the outside doesn't burn before the inside is done. Flip and cook until browned on the other side and done in the middle, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place all ingredients except Almond Breeze almondmilk in a small zip-top bag. Freeze until ready to use. To prepare smoothies, place the ingredients and Almond Breeze almondmilk in a blender and puree until smooth.
Heat a frying pan over medium-low heat. Add butter; heat until completely melted. Add mushrooms and green onions and stir until well coated with butter. Cook until mushrooms are light brown and tender, about 5 minutes. While mushrooms are cooking, combine eggs and milk in a bowl and mix together. Stir egg mixture into mushrooms. Season with salt. Stir until eggs are scrambled and fluffy, about 5 minutes.
Whisk egg with 1 tablespoon milk in a small bowl. Set aside. Bring 1 cup milk, vanilla extract, cinnamon, salt, and nutmeg to a boil in a saucepan over medium-low heat, stirring often. Mix in oats and cook until thickened, about 5 minutes. Pour beaten egg mixture slowly into the oats, stirring constantly. Continue cooking until egg is fully cooked and oatmeal is very thick and creamy, about 5 minutes. Add additional milk if oatmeal gets too thick. Pour oatmeal into a heat-proof bowl; mix in maple syrup and peanut butter. Top with banana slices and crumbled bacon.
Place chocolate drink mix, soy milk, ice, peanut butter syrup, and peanut butter powder in a blender cup and blend until smooth.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Unroll crescent dough and separate individual rolls at perforations. Place 1 piece of ham and 1 tablespoon of Gruyere cheese in the center of each triangle. Fold over the 2 longer sides of the triangle, overlapping them to seal ham and cheese. Arrange crescents 1 inch apart on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, 12 to 14 minutes. Let cool completely on a cooling rack. Wrap crescents individually with wax paper and place into a large resealable bag. Place in the freezer.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place grated cauliflower in a microwave-safe bowl. Cook on high for 2 minutes. Let cool for 5 minutes. Wring cauliflower in a clean dish towel, squeezing out as much moisture as possible. Transfer cauliflower to a large mixing bowl. Add Cheddar cheese, egg, bacon bits, chives, salt, pepper, and cayenne. Mix well. Spray a large baking sheet with cooking spray. Divide cauliflower mixture into 6 equal portions, making sure to leave space between each one. Flatten with your hands and shape into ovals. Bake in the preheated oven until browned, about 15 minutes. Turn broiler on low and broil until crispy, about 5 minutes. Let cool for 5 minutes to firm up.
Combine enchilada sauce, salsa, and corn in a large frying pan over medium heat and bring to a simmer. Add tortillas and simmer until beginning to soften, about 30 seconds. Transfer tortillas to a plate and cover to keep warm. Reduce heat to medium-low. Crack 1 egg at a time and slide it gently into the sauce in the pan. Spoon a bit of sauce over each egg. Cover the pan and poach eggs to desired doneness, about 3 minutes for soft yolks. Place 1 warmed tortilla on a plate. Lift 2 eggs gently from the sauce using a large spoon and place on the tortilla. Spoon extra sauce over eggs and top with grated Colby cheese, sour cream, and olives. Repeat with remaining tortilla, eggs, sauce, and toppings.
Mix yogurt, sweetened condensed milk, and crema in a bowl. Add vanilla extract and stir until well incorporated. Divide cantaloupe, papaya, apple, and banana among 4 individual bowls, arranging them in separate sections. Place strawberries in the center of each bowl. Top each bowl with 1/8 cup each granola, raisins, and coconut. Drizzle 1/4 cup of the crema mixture over each fruit bowl.
Pour water in a multi-functional pressure cooker (such as Instant Pot(R)). Place trivet inside the pot and then place eggs on top. Close and lock the lid. Select high pressure according to manufacturer's instructions; set timer for 3 minutes. Allow 10 to 15 minutes for pressure to build. Release pressure carefully using the quick-release method according to manufacturer's instructions, about 5 minutes. Unlock and remove lid. Place eggs in a bowl full of ice; let stand for 3 minutes to stop the cooking process. Remove from water.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Boil water in a kettle. Grease a small lidded casserole dish with olive oil. Distribute diced ham over the bottom and sprinkle with 1 tablespoon Gruyere cheese. Pour cream on top and season with a little pepper. Crack eggs into the casserole dish one at a time, making sure egg yolks remain intact. Sprinkle with remaining 1 tablespoon Gruyere cheese and fresh chives. Season with salt and pepper. Cover casserole dish and place into a roasting pan. Pour in enough boiling water so it reaches about halfway up the casserole dish. Bake in the preheated oven for 9 minutes with the lid on. Uncover and continue baking until the egg whites are just set but the yolks are still runny, 3 to 6 additional minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch pie dish with cooking spray. Line the prepared pie dish with puff pastry, covering base and sides. Trim excess pastry. Brush bottom with Dijon mustard. Melt butter in a saucepan over medium heat. Add chopped onions and cook until tender, about 5 minutes. Add garlic and cook 1 minute more. Mix in spinach; cook 1 minute more. Whisk heavy cream, eggs, salt, nutmeg, black pepper, and Italian seasoning together in a bowl. Layer 1/2 of the Gouda cheese over the puff pastry and top with spinach mixture. Pour in egg mixture. Sprinkle the remaining Gouda cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until set and golden, about 25 minutes.
Combine water and oats in an electric pressure cooker (such as Instant Pot(R)). Close and lock the lid. Select high pressure according to manufacturer's instructions; set timer for 3 minutes. Allow 10 to 15 minutes for pressure to build. Release pressure using the natural-release method according to manufacturer's instructions, 10 to 40 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Remove pie crust from the refrigerator and allow it to come to room temperature, about 15 minutes. Unroll the unbaked crust and press it firmly without stretching into the bottom and sides of a glass pie plate. Prick the crust all over with a fork. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned, 11 to 13 minutes. Remove from oven and reduce temperature to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Place broccoli in a microwave-safe bowl and cook in the microwave to desired tenderness, 3 to 5 minutes. Layer ham, Swiss cheese, and broccoli in the crust-lined plate. Combine eggs, milk, dry mustard, salt, and black pepper in a bowl; pour over broccoli. Bake in the hot oven until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean, 35 to 45 minutes. Let stand 10 minutes before serving.
Coat a 9-inch microwave-safe pie plate with cooking spray. Spread hash browns over the bottom and up the sides to form a crust. Press potatoes down lightly and dust with 1/4 teaspoon cracked black pepper. Cook in the microwave on high for 2 minutes; remove from microwave and again press potatoes down lightly. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Melt butter in a large nonstick skillet over medium heat. Add onions and cook until soft, 5 to 6 minutes. Add broccoli and garlic; reduce heat to medium-low. Cover and cook until broccoli is crisp-tender, 4 to 5 minutes. Remove from heat and allow to cool. Beat eggs in a bowl using an electric mixer on medium speed until blended. Add cream cheese and beat until almost smooth. Stir in ham, Cheddar cheese, mozzarella cheese, Parmesan cheese, Italian seasoning, salt, and remaining 1/4 teaspoon cracked black pepper. Stir in cooked broccoli mixture and pour into hash brown crust. Bake in the preheated oven until edges are puffed and a knife inserted in the center comes out clean, 45 to 50 minutes. Let stand 10 minutes before slicing.
Beat egg and white sugar together in a bowl until smooth. Whisk in quark cheese, flour, vanilla sugar, and salt. Mix well until dough is thick and sticky. Divide dough into 5 to 6 portions. Form into balls and coat with some flour. Flatten slightly to form into discs (syrniki). Heat oil in skillet over medium-low heat. Add the syrniki; fry until browned, 5 minutes per side.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Mix potatoes, 1 teaspoon olive oil, 1/4 teaspoon black pepper, rosemary, and sea salt together in a bowl. Place on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown and tender, stirring once, about 35 minutes. Reduce oven heat to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking pan with cooking spray. Heat remaining 1 teaspoon olive oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Saute onion until translucent, about 3 minutes. Add kale and tomatoes; cook until wilted, about 2 minutes. Remove from heat. Pour onion mixture into a bowl. Add the roasted potatoes, eggs, Greek yogurt, milk, water, feta cheese, Parmesan cheese, and 1/2 teaspoon salt; whisk until combined, adding more water if needed. Pour into the prepared baking pan. Bake in the preheated oven until center is solid, about 25 minutes.
Combine almond milk, pumpkin puree, maple syrup, vanilla extract, cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves in a saucepan over medium heat; bring to a boil. Add oatmeal and cook, stirring frequently, until chewy and tender, 8 to 10 minutes.
Place pancetta in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 5 minutes. Drain on a paper towel. Fill a large saucepan with 2 to 3 inches of water and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to medium-low and keep the water at a gentle simmer. Crack egg into a small bowl then gently slip egg into the simmering water, holding the bowl just above the surface of water. Cook until egg white is firm and the yolk thickens, 2 1/2 to 3 minutes. Remove the egg from the water with a slotted spoon and dab on a paper towel to remove excess water. Place prosciutto on the toast. Spread a generous layer of avocado on top; season with salt and pepper. Add pancetta; top with the poached egg.
Melt duck fat in a large skillet over medium-high heat until shimmering, about 1 minute. Add potatoes; cook, stirring minimally, until potatoes are golden brown, 5 to 10 minutes. Drain excess fat. Combine parsley, salt, and white pepper in a bowl; toss over cooked potatoes to coat evenly.
Combine eggs and spinach in a blender. Blend on high speed for 1 minute. Scrape down the sides of the blender. Pulse until spinach is fully blended into the eggs, about 1 minute more. Pour hash into a microwave-safe bowl. Heat in the microwave until thoroughly warmed, about 1 minute. Season with black pepper. Spray a nonstick skillet with cooking spray; place over medium heat. Pour in egg-spinach mixture. Cover with a lid. Cook until top is barely set, about 5 minutes. Place corned beef hash over 1 side of the omelet. Slide onto a plate, using the skillet to fold the other side on top. Sprinkle mozzarella cheese over omelet.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F. Melt butter in heatproof or cast-iron skillet over medium heat. Add stevia blend, apples and 1/2 tsp cinnamon. Saute for 8 to 10 minutes or until apples are tender and golden. Transfer apples in skillet to oven and heat for 5 minutes (pancake will puff best in a hot pan). Meanwhile, whisk together eggs, milk, vanilla, remaining cinnamon, salt and liquid stevia. Whisk in flour until combined. Pour batter into hot pan and immediately return to oven. Bake for 15 to 18 minutes or until pancake is puffed, golden and set in the center. Serve warm with a lemon wedge if desired.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Mix Mexican cheese blend, eggs, cottage cheese, baking mix, milk, margarine, and green chiles together in a bowl; transfer to the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until cooked through and bubbling, about 40 minutes.
Whisk eggs, milk, Buffalo sauce, and salt together in a shallow bowl. Soak bread in the egg mixture until completely absorbed, at least 30 minutes. Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat until it starts to foam. Arrange soaked bread in the melted butter; sprinkle Parmesan cheese over bread, patting it into the holes of the bread. Fry until bottoms are browned, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and sprinkle more Parmesan cheese on second side. Cook until bottoms are browned, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip again and cook until cheese is crisp, 2 to 3 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place shells on a baking sheet and prick holes in the bottom of the shells with a fork. Whisk eggs, milk, and black pepper together in a mixing bowl until well blended. Heat a large non-stick skillet over medium heat. Add corned beef hash; cook and stir until hot, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat. Spoon 1 tablespoon of the corned beef hash into the bottom of each shell. Divide spinach among the shells; top with shredded cheese. Slowly pour egg mixture into the shells. Bake in preheated oven until eggs are set, about 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Arrange potato nuggets in a single layer on a large baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven, tossing often, until golden brown and crisp, about 35 minutes. Remove from oven; sprinkle Mexican cheese on top. Continue baking until cheese is melted, about 10 minutes more. Drizzle sausage gravy over potato nuggets and cheese. Scatter avocado, andouille sausage, green onions, and jalapeno peppers on top. Grease a large skillet with cooking spray. Crack in 3 eggs; cook until egg whites are firm and starting to brown on the bottom, about 5 minutes. Transfer to a large plate using a wide spatula. Repeat with remaining eggs. Arrange fried eggs over potato nuggets.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly oil a 9x13-inch baking dish. Lightly beat eggs in a large mixing bowl. Add corned beef hash and stir to break up chunks. Mix in tomato, green pepper, mushrooms, green onion, salt, and pepper. Transfer mixture to prepared baking dish. Bake in preheated oven until veggies have softened and eggs are set, 15 to 20 minutes. Let sit several minutes before cutting into squares and serving.
Combine water, cornmeal, whole milk, coconut milk, white sugar, vanilla extract, salt, nutmeg, and cinnamon in a blender; blend until smooth. Bring the mixture to a boil in a saucepan; whisk occasionally until beginning to thicken, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat when slow bubbles form. Stir frequently until as thick as you like, about 5 minutes. Add raisins. Remove from heat, cover, and let cool before serving, about 5 minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Mix baking mix, skim milk, egg, raspberries, honey, lemon juice, and cream cheese in a bowl to make a slightly thick batter. Let stand for 5 minutes. Spread 1/4 cup batter in the preheated waffle iron. Cook until browned and the iron stops steaming, 3 to 6 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Whisk together eggs, milk and Pyure Organic Liquid Stevia Extract. Set aside. Mix together mascarpone, pumpkin puree, Pyure Bakeable Stevia Blend, pumpkin pie spice and salt until smooth. Divide mascarpone filling among 4 slices of bread. Sandwich with remaining bread slices. Dip sandwiches into egg mixture, turning to coat well. On greased griddle or in greased skillet, cook sandwiches over medium heat for about 3 minutes per side or until crisp and golden brown.
Whisk 4 eggs together in a bowl. Cut 2-inch holes out of the center of each bread slice, reserving the cut-outs. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Dip bread into the whisked eggs, covering completely on both sides. Place each piece of dipped bread, 1 at a time, into the hot skillet; immediately crack an egg into the hole of the bread. Cook until egg is over-easy, about 1 minute per side. Dip the bread cut-outs into the remaining whisked eggs and cook in the hot skillet until browned, about 2 minutes per side. Place the centers back into the center of each piece of bread to complete the top of the "basket".
Combine bananas, yogurt, almond milk, ice cubes, peanut butter, and honey in a blender or high-speed blender (such as Vitamix(R)); blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a loaf pan with cooking spray. Whisk flour, salt, and baking soda together in a bowl. Mix bananas, brown sugar, butter, eggs, almond extract, and amaretto together in a separate bowl. Add flour mixture; mix just until flour is incorporated, about 1 minute. Transfer mixture to the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 1 hour. Let cool before serving, about 30 minutes.
Bring water and rice to a boil in a saucepan. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until rice is tender and liquid has been absorbed, 20 to 25 minutes. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Crumble bacon into small pieces. Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir eggs until set, about 5 minutes. Season scrambled eggs with salt and pepper. Layer rice, eggs, and bacon in a bowl; top generously with cinnamon sugar.
Add Quaker(R) Oats to a container of your choice and pour in milk. Mix in vanilla extract and cinnamon. Alternate between layers of Greek yogurt, blueberries, and banana, then drizzle on honey. Refrigerate overnight and enjoy in the morning! Top with additional blueberries and pecans, if desired.
Add Quaker(R) Oats to a container of your choice and pour in milk. Alternate between layers of yogurt, blackberries. Top with walnuts, chia seeds, and drizzle with honey. Refrigerate overnight and enjoy in the morning! Top with additional blackberries and walnuts, if desired.
Place all ingredients in a blender and blend until smooth. Garnish with additional sliced bananas and oats, if preferred.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a rimmed baking sheet with parchment paper. Make a V-shaped cut in the baguette, leaving ends intact. Lift out V-shaped wedge. Hollow out baguette gently to make a long, skinny bread bowl, being careful not to cut through the bottom or sides. Place baguette on the prepared baking sheet. Whisk eggs in a bowl. Add milk; whisk until well blended. Stir in fontina cheese, spinach, bacon, sun-dried tomatoes, black pepper, and red pepper flakes. Pour mixture slowly into the prepared baguette, spreading evenly with a spoon. Bake in the preheated oven until egg mixture is completely set and cheese is lightly browned, about 30 minutes. Cool for 5 minutes; cut into 1 1/2-inch slices.
Combine oats, quinoa, raisins, walnuts, almond meal, flaxseed meal, coconut, apple, and cinnamon in a pot; add water. Bring mixture to a boil, stirring regularly; reduce heat and simmer until oats are tender and liquid is absorbed, about 10 minutes.
Combine pineapple, carrot, and water in a microwave-safe bowl. Cook in the microwave until carrots and pineapple are partially softened, 1 to 2 minutes. Stir almond milk, oats, cinnamon, and ginger into the bowl. Cook in the microwave for 1 minute. Stir. Continue microwaving in 30-second intervals, stirring after each interval, until oats are tender, 1 to 2 minutes more. Top with walnuts.
Combine banana, cucumbers, red bell pepper, grapefruit juice, and carrots in a blender; blend until smooth. Fill a glass with ice and pour smoothie over ice.
Combine blueberries, coconut milk, green apple, flax seeds, vanilla extract, and stevia in a blender; blend until smooth, about 1 minute.
Combine blueberries, spinach, and protein powder in a blender; blend until smooth.
Bring water to a boil in a large pot. Add sweet potatoes and cook until tender, 20 to 30 minutes; drain. Place sweet potatoes in a bowl and mash with a potato masher until smooth. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Stir sugar and oil together in a bowl until well mixed; beat in banana. Combine flour, baking soda, cinnamon, nutmeg, salt, and baking powder in a bowl. Alternate stirring the flour mixture and 1/3 cup water into the sugar mixture until combined. Mix in sweet potatoes and pecans; stir until batter is smooth. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until top is golden brown, about 1 hour.
Combine pancake mix, coconut milk, berries, banana, oats, and flaxseed meal in a food processor or blender; puree into a smooth batter. Melt coconut oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Drop large spoonfuls of the batter into the skillet and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until pancake is browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Arrange pancakes on a wire rack; let stand until completely cool, about 20 minutes. Wrap each pancake individually in plastic wrap and place in a large resealable plastic bag. Transfer to the freezer.
Mix banana and ground flax seeds together in a bowl. Add eggs, baking powder, and cinnamon; beat together until combined. Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Drop small spoonfuls of batter into the skillet. Cook until bubbles form and edges look dry, 4 to 5 minutes per side.
Pierce a sweet potato with a fork and place in a microwave-safe bowl; heat in microwave until tender, 5 to 10 minutes. Cool and measure out 3/4 cup sweet potato, reserving the rest for another use. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Combine flour, baking powder, cinnamon, and salt together in a large bowl. Mix sweet potato, eggs, melted butter, brown sugar, lime juice, vanilla extract, and grated lime zest together in a bowl. Pour sweet potato mixture into the flour mixture; stir until batter is smooth. Spoon batter into the waffle iron and cook according to manufacturer's instructions until golden brown, about 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions; spray with cooking spray. Mix hash browns, eggs, milk, flour, onion, sriracha sauce, garlic, baking powder, salt, and pepper together in a bowl to make batter. Pour 1/4 of the mixture onto the preheated waffle iron; spread to the edges with a spatula. Cook until golden and warmed through, 5 to 7 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add garlic powder, onion powder, chili powder, ground cumin, and red pepper flakes; stir until mixed. Add potatoes; cook and stir until softened, about 12 minutes. Stir luncheon meat into the potato mixture; cook and stir until lightly browned, about 5 minutes. Stir in tomato sauce. Remove from heat. Heat tortillas in a toaster oven or conventional oven on warm setting until warmed, about 2 minutes. Place large spoonfuls of the potato mixture into warmed tortillas; season with salt and pepper.
Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add onion, celery, rosemary, red pepper flakes, salt, and pepper; cook and stir with a wooden spoon or spatula until onion starts to turn translucent, about 4 minutes. Stir in garlic and cook for 1 minute. Push onion mixture to outer edges of the skillet and crack egg into the middle. Break yolk with the wooden spoon and stir in onion mixture. Add tomatoes; cook and stir until egg is almost cooked, about 3 minutes. Stir in feta cheese until slightly melted, about 1 minute. Add spinach. Remove from heat and stir until slightly wilted, about 30 seconds.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Combine flour, sunflower seeds, chia seeds, salt, and baking soda in a bowl; mix in almond milk, quinoa, and molasses. Spread into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 1 hour.
Fill a pot with water and bring to a rolling boil. Stir in sweet potato and return to a boil. Cook until sweet potato is tender, 7 to 10 minutes; drain. Mash sweet potato in a small bowl with a fork. Mix 1 cup mashed sweet potato, eggs, milk, oat flour, protein powder, flax seeds, pumpkin pie spice, and baking powder together in a bowl. Stir in banana, almonds, pecans, and walnuts until batter is combined. Melt coconut oil in a skillet over medium heat. Pour enough batter into the skillet to create a 4- to 6-inch pancake. Cook, flipping once, until golden brown, 3 to 5 minutes per side.
Toast whole wheat bread until golden brown. Spread refried beans on top. Mash avocado in a small bowl; stir in lime juice, garlic powder, salt, chili powder, and cumin. Spread avocado over refried beans. Heat a small nonstick skillet over medium heat. Crack egg into the skillet; cook until white is set, about 2 minutes. Cover skillet and cook until yolk is set, about 2 minutes more. Place egg over mashed avocado. Garnish with pico de gallo, queso fresco, and hot sauce.
Combine coffee, ice, raspberries, almond milk, cocoa powder, and coconut sugar in a blender; blend until frothy.
Whisk eggs in a small bowl until smooth. Preheat a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Pour in eggs. Scatter feta cheese, avocado, tomatoes, olives, and basil over 1 side. Cook until bottom is golden brown, about 5 minutes. Fold over; cook until center is set, about 3 minutes more.
Grease a nonstick skillet with cooking spray and heat over medium heat. Add onion; cook and stir until slightly softened, about 2 minutes. Add artichoke hearts and cook until heated through, 1 to 2 minutes. Stir in spinach and tomatoes; cook until spinach is wilted, about 5 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Whisk eggs, water, and pepper together in a bowl. Wipe out skillet; spray with cooking spray. Heat over medium heat. Pour in egg mixture; cook until mostly set, about 3 minutes. Gently push cooked edges into the center; tilt skillet so uncooked eggs flow underneath. Cook until set, 2 to 4 minutes. Spoon spinach mixture over 1 side of the omelet. Fold in half and serve.
Combine almond milk, vanilla yogurt, banana, strawberries, and almond butter in a blender; blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F. Place 1 pie crust into an ungreased 9-inch pie plate. Mix prepared sausage, 5 eggs, mixed vegetables and cheese together in bowl; season with salt and pepper. Pour into crust. Top with remaining pie crust and crimp edges to seal. Cut 3 slits in top crust. Brush with remaining 1 beaten egg. Bake for 35 to 37 minutes or until internal temperature reaches 165 degrees F. If needed, cover pot pie with foil to prevent top crust from over browning. Let stand for 10 minutes before cutting and serving.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F. Spray large baking sheet with cooking spray; set aside. Combine peanut butter, oil and honey in small saucepan. Heat on low until smooth and pourable. Meanwhile, process 1 cup of oats in blender or food processor until finely ground. Combine ground oats with remaining oats, sugar and salt in large bowl. Pour warm peanut butter mixture over oat mixture and stir well. Pour onto prepared baking sheet. Bake 30 minutes, stirring every 10 minutes. Let cool 10 minutes, break into chunks and allow to cool completely on baking sheet. Store in airtight container at room temperature for up to 7 days.
Place beef slices in a mixing bowl. Sprinkle with asada seasoning and garlic powder; toss in bowl to evenly coat. Let marinade 5 minutes. Heat oil in a large, deep skillet over medium-high heat. Place beef strips in skillet and cook and stir until browned. Stir in bell pepper, onions, and jalapeno pepper. Add tomatoes and potatoes. Cook mixture until potatoes are tender, 5 to 8 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. Transfer mixture to a bowl. Melt 1 tablespoon butter in the same skillet. Add the eggs, stirring occasionally, until eggs are scrambled and set. Transfer the beef mixture back to skillet. Cook and stir until warmed through, about 2 minutes. Melt the remaining 2 tablespoons butter in a small dish in microwave. Divide shredded cheese among tortillas; divide beef and veggie mixture and place on the cheese. Fold in sides of tortilla and roll up. Brush with melted butter and place folded side down in pan to brown; flip and brown on top side. Burrito should be warmed though.
Combine hot water, butter, MCT oil, cacao powder, cacao butter, vanilla powder, liquid stevia, and salt in a blender; blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Mix whole wheat flour, brown sugar, flaxseed meal, oats, white sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a large bowl. Combine eggs, butter, 1/3 cup plus 1 tablespoon butter milk, and vanilla extract in another bowl. Stir in flour mixture. Add bananas; mix until batter is well-combined. Pour into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 50 minutes to 1 hour. Cool in the pan for 5 minutes. Invert onto a wire rack and let cool, about 25 minutes.
Blend almonds in a blender until chopped; add chocolate chips and coconut. Blend mixture until a coarse powder forms. Mix yogurt into almond mixture using a spoon; add dragon fruit, pineapple, and honey. Blend until desired consistency is reached.
Combine milk, berries, brown sugar, grape juice, vanilla extract, and ice cube in a blender; blend until smooth.
Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add ham and red bell pepper; cook and stir until slightly softened, 3 to 5 minutes. Add eggs; cook, stirring gently, until scrambled and set, 3 to 5 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Wipe out skillet and place 1 flour tortilla on the bottom. Place 3 slices of mozzarella cheese on top. Top with egg mixture and remaining 3 slices mozzarella cheese. Cover with second tortilla. Cook until golden, about 1 minute. Flip and continue cooking until second side is golden, about 1 minute more.
Cook and stir SPAM(R) with Bacon in a large skillet over medium heat until just browned, about 7 minutes; remove from skillet and set aside. Add just enough oil to the same skillet to coat; cook and stir onion and avocado until browned, about 7 minutes; keep warm. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat; crack the eggs into skillet and cook until whites are mostly firm, about 2 minutes. Flip eggs gently and cook until desired doneness is reached, about 2 minutes for over easy eggs; season with salt and pepper. Stir SPAM(R) with Bacon back into skillet with onion mixture; drizzle lime juice over the top. Divide hash onto 4 plates; place an egg on top of each serving.
Prepare pancake mix according to package directions. Fry SPAM(R) Classic in skillet over medium heat until lightly browned, about 5 minutes. Pre-heat griddle or large skillet to medium and spray lightly with non-stick cooking spray. Pour pancake batter onto griddle, using about 1/3 cup batter per pancake. As the first side is cooking, top each pancake with some cubes of SPAM(R) Classic; cook pancakes until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 3 minutes. Flip pancakes over; cook on the other side until golden, about 2 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter and SPAM(R) Classic. Serve topped with pancake syrup.
Place strawberries, sugar, and water into blender and blend until the mixture is smooth. Pour mixture into a 9x13-inch baking pan; stir in the wine. Freeze, stirring once about halfway through, until mixture is slushy, 4 1/2 to 5 hours. Remove from freezer and stir to breakup the larger frozen clumps.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Arrange frozen French fries in a single layer on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until golden, about 20 minutes; keep warm. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels; crumble when cool enough to handle. Heat a large skillet over medium heat; spray with cooking spray. Crack eggs into skillet; season with salt and pepper. Reduce heat to medium low, cover skillet loosely, and cook until egg whites are firm and yolks are still runny, about 3 minutes. Divide French fries onto 4 plates; sprinkle evenly with crumbled bacon. Drizzle each serving with hollandaise sauce, sprinkle with chives, and top with an egg.
Grease and preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Mix sourdough starter and eggs in a bowl. Mix in flour, baking soda, salt, and sugar. Stir applesauce into the batter; mix well to combine. Pour 1/4 to 1/2 cup of the batter onto the preheated waffle iron. Bake until golden brown according to manufacturer's instructions, about 3 minutes.
Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Run cauliflower through the food processor using the shredding blade to create cauliflower "rice". Heat avocado oil in an oven-safe skillet over medium-high heat. Add cauliflower "rice" and garlic salt; cook and stir until tender, 3 to 4 minutes. Whisk egg whites, eggs, garlic powder, black pepper, and salt together in a bowl; pour over cauliflower mixture. Cook until eggs are mostly set, 5 to 7 minutes. Place skillet under the broiler until eggs are completely set, 5 to 7 minutes. Cool 5 minutes before serving.
Place water, baby kale, bananas, apples, strawberries, and blackberries, respectively, into a heavy-duty blender. Process on high until completely blended.
Layer avocado, mango, kale, banana, white beans, and water in a blender; blend until smooth, adding more water for a thinner smoothie.
Layer banana, spinach, mixed fruit, flax meal, protein powder, chia seeds, and matcha powder in a blender in the order listed; add enough water to cover. Cover blender and blend until smooth.
Combine egg substitute, soy milk, vanilla extract, and cinnamon in a shallow dish. Overlap banana slices over 1 slice of bread. Place second slice of bread on top and press down so sandwich holds together. Dip sandwich in egg mixture and coat both sides. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat; spray with cooking spray. Place sandwich in hot skillet and cook until browned, about 3 minutes. Flip it over carefully and cook second side until browned, about 3 minutes more.
Whisk eggs, 3 tablespoons milk, white sugar, and vanilla extract together in a shallow bowl until smooth. Heat 1/4 inch of oil in a large saucepan over medium heat. Dip 4 pieces of bread in egg mixture and fry until golden brown, about 2 minutes per side. Repeat with remaining pieces. Combine 2 tablespoons of milk with custard powder in a small bowl; stir until smooth. Bring remaining milk to a boil in a small saucepan. Stir custard mixture into the saucepan. Reduce heat and cook, stirring frequently, until custard thickens, about 5 minutes. Place 8 bread toasts on a shallow tray. Spread custard over each piece. Cover with remaining 8 toasts to form a sandwich. Dust with confectioners' sugar. Top each sandwich with a dollop of whipped cream and a strawberry. Insert a toothpick through the fruit to hold the sandwich together.
Place dates in a small bowl and cover with cold water; let soak, about 5 minutes. Drain and chop. Place chopped dates, banana, carrot, almond milk, cinnamon, and ginger in a blender; puree until smoothie is thick and smooth. Pour into a serving bowl. Top smoothie bowl with flaked coconut and goji berries.
Grind oats and almonds to a flour-like consistency using a coffee grinder. Blend soy milk and banana in a blender. Add ground oats and almonds, cacao powder, and cocoa powder; blend until smooth, 30 seconds to 1 minute.
Mix croutons, Cheddar cheese, and bacon together in a bowl; transfer to an 11x7-inch baking dish. Beat eggs, mustard, onion powder, and black pepper together in a bowl; pour over croutons mixture. Cover dish with plastic wrap and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Remove plastic wrap from dish. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted near the center comes out clean, about 45 minutes. Let casserole stand for 5 minutes before serving.
Juice ginger, carrots, and oranges in a juicer, respectively. Serve immediately.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8-inch round glass baking dish. Mix flour, milk, raisins, sugar, caraway seeds, vegetable oil, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl until dough is not wet enough to pour and not dry enough to handle. Add more milk if dough is too dry. Transfer dough to the baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, about 50 minutes.
Blend flour, eggs, milk, cold water, and butter together in a food processor or blender until smooth, about 30 seconds. Scrape batter off the sides with a rubber spatula and blend 15 seconds more. Place batter in the refrigerator, at least 1 hour. Beat peanut butter in the bowl of a stand mixer using the paddle attachment until smooth and creamy. Beat confectioners' sugar, 1 tablespoon at a time, into creamed peanut butter, mixing well after each addition. Add 1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract and rum-flavored extract and mix well. Store peanut butter filling in an air-tight container until 30 minutes before needed. Heat a 10-inch non-stick skillet over medium-low heat. Remove the skillet from the burner; add a scant 1/4 cup batter to the center of the pan and swirl and tilt immediately to spread the batter evenly over the bottom of the skillet. Return the skillet to the heat. Cook crepe until edges appear slightly dry and pull away from the pan, about 1 minute. Gently slip a thin spatula under the crepe and gently flip. Cook the second side until lightly browned on the bottom, 45 to 60 seconds. Transfer crepe to a plate. Repeat until all the batter is used, separating each crepe with waxed or parchment paper. Melt chocolate chips in the top of a double boiler over simmering water, stirring frequently and scraping down the sides with a rubber spatula to avoid scorching. Mix cream and 1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract into the melted chocolate; cook, stirring frequently, until chocolate sauce is thickened, about 20 minutes. Spread peanut butter filling over each crepe and drizzle warm chocolate sauce over filling. Fold crepe in half or roll crepe around filling for Suzette-style crepes.
Heat oven to 350 degrees F. Cook peppers, onions and garlic in dressing in 10-inch ovenproof skillet on medium heat 5 min., stirring frequently. Add potatoes; cook 5 min., stirring frequently. Remove from heat. Spread potato mixture to evenly cover bottom of skillet; top with ham. Whisk eggs and milk until blended; pour over ham. Top with VELVEETA. Bake 30 min. or until center is set. Sprinkle with cilantro.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8-inch square baking dish. Combine oats, oat flour, salt, and baking soda in a bowl. Add eggs, almond milk, brown sugar, and vanilla extract and mix well. Fold almonds, chocolate chips, and coconut into oats mixture; pour into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until set in the middle, about 40 minutes. Cool before cutting into squares.
Place barley in a bowl and add 1 cup water; soak for 2 hours or overnight. Drain. Combine drained barley, apples, 2 cups water, brown sugar, cinnamon, butter, lemon juice, nutmeg, and salt in a saucepan; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low and simmer until barley and apples are softened and water is absorbed, adding more water if needed, about 1 hour. Remove saucepan from heat and stir walnuts into barley.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat water in a kettle or pot until it begins to steam; remove from heat. Pour 1 cup steaming water into the bottom of a casserole dish. Spoon 1/4 cup marinara sauce into each ramekin. Crack 1 egg over marinara in each ramekin. Arrange ramekins in the water in the casserole dish. Fill casserole dish with enough water to reach the midpoint of each ramekin. Bake in the preheated oven until yolks are firm, about 25 minutes.
Spray a 9-inch square baking dish with cooking spray. Place bread slices in a single layer in the bottom of the prepared baking dish. Whisk milk, egg substitute, and chives together in a bowl; pour over bread slices into prepared baking dish. Sprinkle bacon crumbles over the top. Cover the dish with plastic wrap and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Remove and discard plastic wrap from baking dish; let dish come to room temperature, about 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake casserole in the preheated oven for 40 minutes. Sprinkle cheese over the top and continue baking until cheese is melted and casserole is set, about 5 minutes more.
Blend watermelon, water, strawberries, mango, sugar, and lemon juice in a blender until smooth, about 5 minutes.
Combine oatmeal and milk together in a microwave-safe bowl; heat in microwave until warm and thickened, about 30 seconds. Stir blueberries and maple syrup into oatmeal.
Blend almond milk, green apple, ice, vanilla protein powder, flax seed, almond butter, and cinnamon together in a blender until smooth, adding more almond milk for a thinner consistency.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease 12 muffin cups. Mix almond milk, applesauce, apple, raisins, pecans, flax meal, eggs, brown sugar, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a bowl; stir in oats until well mixed. Let sit for 5 minutes. Scoop mixture into the prepared muffin cups using an ice cream scoop. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned, about 20 minutes. Let oatmeal sit in muffin tin for 5 minutes before transferring to a wire rack to cool completely.
Process apples, orange, lemon, and ginger through a juicer; stir in turmeric until evenly incorporated.
Place acai sorbet in a bowl and top with a layer of granola. Line strawberries and bananas on granola layer and top with coconut and a drizzle of honey.
Blend ice in a blender until crumbly; add yogurt, milk, blueberries, and cinnamon. Blend until smooth. Taste smoothie and add desired amount of sugar; blend.
Layer pineapple, banana, spinach, avocado, almond butter, and maca powder in a blender; pour in water. Blend until smooth.
Set oven rack 3 to 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Heat olive oil in a 10-inch oven-proof skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion until soft and transparent, about 5 minutes. Beat eggs, egg whites, spinach, Parmesan cheese, parsley, salt, basil, oregano, and black pepper together in a bowl; pour over onions. Cook over low heat, gently lifting with a spatula and tilting skillet to let liquid run under cooked parts, until partially cooked, about 10 minutes. Arrange tomatoes and black olives on top of semi-soft frittata. Broil frittata in preheated oven until slightly browned on top, about 5 minutes. Cut into wedges.
Pour beer into a glass and top with orange juice.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Mix maple syrup and coconut oil together in a bowl; add oats, pecans, and almond flour and mix until evenly coated. Spread onto a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned, about 40 minutes.
Preheat oven to 320 degrees F (160 degrees C). Grease a small loaf pan. Beat sugar and egg whites together in a bowl using an electric mixer until stiff peaks form. Add egg yolk and mix well. Stir grapeseed oil, honey, and milk into egg mixture. Sift flour and green tea powder 2 times into a bowl; mix into egg mixture. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, about 50 minutes.
Combine oats, cocoa powder, flax seed, maple syrup, vanilla extract, and salt in a saucepan over medium heat; cook and stir until thick, 10 to 15 minutes. Transfer oatmeal to a bowl. Combine honey and coconut oil in a microwave-safe bowl; heat in microwave until melted, about 20 seconds. Pour honey mixture over oatmeal and top with pecans and coconut.
Coat 13x9x2-inch baking pan with nonstick cooking spray. Arrange half of the bread in bottom of pan. Top with half the meat, half the green chiles and half the sage. Crumble half the goat cheese over top. Repeat layers with remaining ingredients. Heat oven to 350 degrees F.  Whisk together eggs, milk, salt and pepper in large bowl.  Pour over casserole, pressing down bread to soak up liquid. Let stand 20 to 30 minutes at room temperature. Bake casserole at 350 degrees F for 1 hour until knife inserted near center comes out clean. Let stand 10 minutes before cutting to serve.
Stir flour, soy milk, egg, flax seeds, baking powder, sugar, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon grease into a small glass container and chill until set, at least 1 hour. Cut bacon strips into 1/4-inch slices. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Combine flour and 1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon baking powder in a large bowl. Measure out 6 tablespoons plus 2 teaspoons chilled bacon grease into the bowl. Knead grease into the flour mixture with one hand, turning bowl with the other, until dough is crumbly. Make a well in the center of the dough and slowly pour in 10 tablespoons plus 2 teaspoons milk. Mix with one hand until milk is incorporated and dough feels wet to the touch. Form dough into a thick disc. Cut into 16 equal-sized pieces with a knife. Roll dough into individual balls and place them on the baking sheet. Flatten them into circles about 2 1/2 inches in diameter. Place a tablespoon of bacon slices in the center of 8 circles. Top with remaining circles of dough. Seal so that the top circle meets the bottom using your fingertips. Whisk egg yolk with maple syrup in a bowl; brush over sides and top of each scone. Let scones rest, about 15 minutes. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, 12 to 15 minutes. Place a clean towel on a plate, transfer scones to the towel and fold towel over to keep warm.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch casserole dish with cooking spray. Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add potato and onion; cook and stir until potatoes are golden brown and soft, about 10 minutes. Place chorizo in a nonstick skillet over medium heat; cook and stir until browned and crumbly, about 5 minutes. Whisk eggs with milk in a large bowl. Add red bell pepper, cooked potato and onion, and 1 cup Cheddar cheese to the egg mixture; pour into the casserole dish. Sprinkle 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until firm and cheese is melted and starting to brown, about 30 minutes. Cool before serving, about 10 minutes.
Place almond milk, banana, almond butter, and chia seeds in a blender. Lightly sprinkle cinnamon and nutmeg on top; blend until smooth, 10 to 15 seconds.
Blend 1/2 banana, peaches, applesauce, water, and coconut oil together in a blender until smooth; pour into a serving bowl. Slice remaining half banana and arrange on top of smoothie. Add shredded coconut, almonds, and raisins.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a baking sheet. Stir egg, Tex-Mex cheese, green onions, jalapenos, and green chiles together in a bowl; stir in mashed potatoes. Form potato mixture into 8 patties; place on prepared baking sheet. Stir bread crumbs, cumin, and chili powder together in a small bowl. Dot each patty with 1 1/2 tablespoons salsa; sprinkle with 1 1/2 tablespoons bread crumb mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until cheese is melted and topping is lightly browned, about 20 minutes.
Combine milk, oats, yogurt, brown sugar, flaxseed meal, molasses, vanilla extract, cinnamon, ginger, salt, nutmeg, cloves, and allspice in a glass container. Refrigerate mixture 8 hours to overnight. Top with raisins and walnuts just before serving.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly oil a pan; cook chanterelle mushrooms, shallot, and garlic over medium heat until mushrooms are tender and all water has evaporated, 5 to 7 minutes. Stir in cooked bacon. Transfer mixture to the pie crust and sprinkle Swiss cheese on top. Beat eggs and half-and-half together in a bowl; pour egg mixture over the Swiss cheese in the pie crust. Bake in the preheated oven until quiche is set, 30 to 45 minutes. Cool 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line 2 baking sheets with parchment paper. Grind 2 1/4 cups oats in a food processor to yield 2 cups ground oats. Add walnuts, raisins, flax seeds, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt. Stir in remaining 1 cup oats. Stir thoroughly with a spoon, but do not grind further. Make a well in the center of the oat mixture. Add bananas, eggs, applesauce, honey, and vanilla extract. Mash together and stir in oat mixture. Drop tablespoonfuls of the cookie dough on the baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven until edges are set, about 14 minutes.
Combine zucchini with coconut oil and butter in a medium skillet over medium heat. Add Parmesan cheese, chili powder, salt, and cayenne pepper. Stir until cheese melts. Reduce heat to low and add eggs; stir quickly until fully mixed in. Increase heat back to medium and cook, stirring and flipping occasionally, until edges of the hash are lightly browned, about 15 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Spray salmon with olive oil and place in a baking dish. Season with sea salt, black pepper, basil, and 1 1/2 tablespoons crushed garlic. Combine cream, 12 spinach leaves, remaining crushed garlic, salt, black pepper, and cayenne pepper in a food processor. Blend until smooth and pour mixture over salmon in the baking dish. Cover with remaining spinach leaves and shredded mozzarella cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until cheese is melted and salmon flakes easily with a fork, 15 to 20 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 9x13-inch baking sheets. Mix oats, flour, brown sugar, white sugar, salt, cinnamon, cloves, and ginger in a large bowl. Stir in oil, honey, molasses, and eggs. Mix until well-combined. Pat mixture onto baking sheets using your hands. Bake in the preheated oven until edges begin to brown and center no longer looks glossy, 15 to 20 minutes. Cool for about 10 minutes; cut into bars while still warm.
Melt 5 tablespoons butter in a saucepan over low heat; remove from burner and set aside. Melt remaining 2 tablespoons butter in a very large skillet over medium heat; add pears and cook, turning occasionally, until mostly tender, about 6 minutes. Sprinkle sugar over pears and cook until browned and tender, about 3 minutes. Cover skillet and keep warm over low heat. Combine whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour, cinnamon, baking soda, ginger, and salt in a large bowl; make a well in the center. Mix melted butter, eggs, molasses, buttermilk, and milk in a separate bowl. Pour butter mixture into the well of the flour mixture and stir just until batter is moistened and slightly lumpy. Preheat and grease a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Pour batter into preheated waffle iron and cook according to manufacturer's instructions; repeat with remaining batter. Serve each waffle with pears and 1 tablespoon vanilla yogurt.
Prick each potato in several places with a fork. Microwave on high for about 9 minutes, or according to the microwave manufacturer instructions. Once tender, carefully move to a cutting board and cut each in half. Let cool. While the potatoes are cooking in the microwave, get started on cooking the sausage. Place the sausage in a medium skillet over medium-high heat. Stir it occasionally, breaking it into small pieces. Cook until no longer pink, about 10 minutes. While the sausage is cooking, chop all your vegetables and herbs. Roughly chop the spinach. Finely chop the cilantro. Slice the green onions and separate the whites and the greens. As the sausage finishes cooking, add the eggs to a medium bowl. Whisk in 1/4 teaspoon of black pepper, the garlic powder and chili powder. Continue to whisk until the whites and yolks are blended, about 15 seconds. Heat 1 tablespoon of the oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add the eggs. Cook, stirring occasionally for about 5 minutes. Stir in the spinach and cook just until the eggs cook through and the spinach begins to wilt, 1 or 2 more minutes. While the eggs cook, you can begin to work on the potatoes. Roughly chop the potatoes (leave the skins on) and place in a medium bowl. Stir in the white portions of the green onions, 1/2 of the chopped cilantro, the remaining 1 tablespoon of olive oil, the remaining 1/4 teaspoon of black pepper and the sea salt. The ingredients should be mixed into the potatoes, but the potatoes should still be chunky. To assemble, arrange an equal portion of potatoes, eggs and sausage in each of 4 bowls. Crumble the cotija cheese and sprinkle an equal amount over each bowl. Divide the remaining cilantro and the green portions of the green onions and sprinkle them into each bowl. Add your favorite toppings and serve.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Put coconut oil into a 9x13-inch baking dish. Place baking dish in the preheated oven to melt coconut oil, about 3 minutes. Whisk eggs and coconut milk together in a large bowl. Whisk in spelt flour and salt to make a smooth batter. Pour batter into the hot baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until puffed and golden, rotating the baking dish once halfway through, about 18 minutes.
Beat egg whites in a bowl using an electric mixer until soft peaks form. Beat cream, egg yolks, almond meal, baking powder, and salt together in a separate bowl until smooth and creamy. Fold egg whites into cream mixture until batter is just mixed. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Combine oats and kefir in a small bowl. Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate until oats soak up the kefir and thicken, 8 hours to overnight. Stir apple and strawberries into the oats. Add honey to reach desired level of sweetness.
Preheat oven to 250 degrees F (120 degrees C). Mix oats, almonds, coconut, chia seeds, flax seeds, and hemp hearts together in a bowl. Mix honey, orange juice, and vanilla extract together in a separate large bowl. Add oat mixture to honey mixture; stir well until evenly coated. Spread granola onto ungreased baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, about 50 minutes. Mix chocolate chips into granola; cool to room temperature.
Whisk buttermilk, eggs, and butter together in a bowl. Mix flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt together in a separate bowl. Whisk flour mixture into buttermilk mixture until smooth. Set batter aside until bubbling, 10 to 15 minutes. Pour champagne into batter; stir gently. Grease a non-stick skillet lightly and heat over medium-high heat. Pour 1/3 cup batter onto the skillet; cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Beat egg whites in a large bowl until fluffy. Fold in milk, butter, and honey. Add cornmeal, flour, baking powder, and salt, stirring slowly until batter is smooth. Fold in corn and green chile peppers. Scoop some batter onto waffle iron; cook until golden brown and crisp or until waffle iron stops steaming, 3 to 4 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend banana, mango, coconut yogurt, milk, and ground flax seed in a blender until smooth.
Mix almond milk and protein powder together in a cup; pour into a blender. Add spinach, pear, cashews, and green tea powder; blend until smooth.
Blend kale, blueberries, milk, apple juice, raspberries, maple syrup, cocoa powder, vanilla extract, and sea salt together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Mix oats, coconut oil, hazelnuts, cocoa nibs, maple syrup, ground coffee beans, brown sugar, cocoa powder, instant coffee granules, coffee-flavored extract, kosher salt, cinnamon, black pepper, and vanilla extract together in a bowl; spread onto the prepared baking sheet, smoothing with a spatula. Bake in the preheated oven for 10 minutes; stir and continue cooking until lightly browned and beginning to crisp, about 10 minutes more. Cool granola completely. Mix chocolate chips into cooled granola and store in an air-tight container.
Blend spinach, banana, apple, strawberries, mango, milk, protein powder, and honey together in a blender until smooth.
Mix pumpkin mix and cinnamon together in a bowl; add pumpkin butter, milk, egg, and lemon juice and stir until batter is smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter, about 1/4 cup per pancake, onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Bring water and salt to a boil in a saucepan; add oats and simmer until desired consistency is reached, about 5 minutes. Remove saucepan from heat and stir in bananas, sunflower seed butter, and agave nectar.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spread oats onto a 10x15-inch jelly roll pan. Bake oats in the preheated oven until toasted, 10 to 12 minutes. Combine toasted oats, apples, pecans, butter, brown sugar, and cinnamon in a large bowl until evenly combined; spread onto jelly roll pan. Bake in the oven for 15 minutes. Stir raisins into granola and continue baking, stirring every 10 minutes, until oats granola is evenly browned, 20 to 25 minutes more. Cool granola to room temperature and stir until crumbly. Store granola in a tightly covered container in the refrigerator.
Layer bananas, peach slices, almond butter, and hemp seeds in a blender; pour in water. Cover and blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray 12 muffin cups with cooking spray. Mix egg substitute, spinach, bell peppers, Cheddar cheese, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl; spoon into the prepared muffin cups. Bake in the preheated oven until tops begin to turn golden brown, about 25 minutes.
Place banana, pineapple, carrot, hemp seeds, ginger, orange zest, cinnamon, coconut milk, and water in a blender in the order listed; blend on high until creamy and smooth.
Blend raspberries, cantaloupe, soy milk, and tofu together in a blender until smooth.
Heat a large skillet over high heat. Once hot, lie the watermelon into the pan with the rind along the edge of the pan, leaving one half the the cooking surface free. Crack eggs into the free space in the skillet. Top the eggs with 1/4 of the Parmesan cheese. Cook until the egg white begins to solidify on the bottom, 1 to 2 minutes. Begin folding the solid egg white over the translucent egg white. Continue cooking until the egg can be tilted with the edge of a spatula without the top part of it sliding away from the cooked egg white and is lightly crisped on the bottom, about 2 minutes more.  Flip both the eggs and the watermelon pieces; sprinkle another 1/4 of the Parmesan cheese over the eggs and another 1/4 of the Parmesan over the watermelon pieces. Continue cooking until the egg whites are crisp on the underside, but the yolk remains soft when pressed lightly with the back of a spatula, 1 to 2 minutes. Remove eggs to a plate. Continue cooking watermelon until darkened on the underside, about 1 minute more. Flip watermelon pieces again, top with remaining Parmesan cheese, and remove to the plate with the eggs. Sear ham slices in any remaining liquid in the skillet just until lightly browned and heated through, 1 to 2 minutes per side. Transfer to the plate next to the watermelon and eggs.
Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir French fries in hot butter until browned and hot, 3 to 5 minutes. Add eggs and season with salt and black pepper; cook and stir until eggs are scrambled and set, 3 to 5 minutes.
Layer yogurt, banana, and blueberries in a blender, respectively. Add as much spinach to blender that will fit; pour in water. Blend on high speed until smooth, adding the remaining spinach if needed. Add ice for a colder and thicker smoothie. Add more water for a thinner smoothie.
Combine flour, sugar, and anise seed together in a very large bowl; create a well in the center. Mix warm water and yeast together in a bowl. Let stand until the yeast softens and begins to form a creamy foam, about 10 minutes. Beat warm milk, eggs, and butter together in a bowl; stir into yeast mixture. Add milk mixture to the well in the flour mixture. Knead flour-milk mixture using your hands until dough and your hands are no longer sticky. Cover dough with a clean cotton cloth and let rise, 8 hours to overnight. Grease and flour 6 loaf pans. Punch dough down and divide into 6 portions. Mold each portion into a round shape and place each in a prepared pan. Cover pans and let rise for 1 hour more. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until bread is cooked through, 45 to 50 minutes.
Combine cottage cheese, applesauce, kale, banana, water, ice, lemon juice, vanilla (if using) and cinnamon in a blender. Blend on high speed for 2 minutes or until very smooth. Serve immediately.
Place the mango, cottage cheese, ice cubes, orange juice, water, banana, honey, flax oil and vanilla in a blender. Blend for 2 minutes or until very smooth; serve immediately.
Blend almond milk, avocado, banana, peanut butter, ice cubes, and vanilla extract in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Set an oven rack in the center position of the oven. Prepare a 13x9-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Heat oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Saute spinach in hot oil until wilted, 2 to 3 minutes; season with salt and pepper to taste. Beat milk, eggs, 1 teaspoon salt, and freshly ground black pepper together in a bowl until smooth. Line the bottom of the prepared baking dish with half the baguette slices. Spread about half the sausage cubes and half the sauteed spinach over the bread layer. Sprinkle 3 ounces Cheddar cheese, 3 ounces mozzarella cheese, and 1/4 cup scallions over the sausage and spinach. Pour 1 cup of the milk mixture over everything. Arrange remaining bread in a layer over the ingredients in the baking dish. Repeat layering of sausage, spinach, Cheddar cheese, mozzarella cheese, and green onions, respectively. Pour remaining milk mixture over the dish to soak ingredients completely. Cover dish with plastic wrap. Weigh plastic wrap down with 3 soup cans to keep top of strata immersed in liquid. Let sit at room temperature for 15 minutes. Bake in preheated oven until set in the center, about 50 minutes. Switch oven to Broil and continue cooking until the top of the strata begins to puff and turn brown in spots, about 5 minutes more. Let strata cool 8 to 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Prepare a 13x9-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Put an oven rack in the middle tier of the oven. Beat eggs, half-and-half, and black pepper together in a bowl until smooth. Arrange 6 bread slices into the bottom of the prepared baking dish. Spread about half the ham and half the spinach over the bread. Sprinkle half the green onions and half the Cheddar cheese over the ham and spinach. Spread the bread cubes over the layers and pour 1 cup of the egg mixture over everything. Repeat layering of ham, spinach, green onions, and Cheddar cheese and pour remaining egg mixture over the top. Cover dish with plastic wrap. Put some soup cans atop the plastic wrap to help keep ingredients immersed in liquid; refrigerate at least 15 minutes. Bake in preheated oven until the liquid sets in the middle of the dish, about 50 minutes. An instant-read thermometer inserted into the center should read 155 degrees F (68 degrees C). Let the casserole stand for 8 to 10 minutes before serving.
Cook butter in a small saucepan over medium heat until beginning to brown, 2 to 3 minutes. Grind uncooked rice in a blender until grains are broken; add to butter, cook and stir until lightly browned, about 5 minutes. Stir coconut milk, water, sugar, and cinnamon together in a bowl to dissolve sugar; gradually add to rice, stirring constantly. Reduce heat to low, cover saucepan, and simmer until rice is tender, about 20 minutes.
Place strawberries, banana, water, and yogurt in a blender; blend until smooth, gradually adding more water if a thinner smoothie is desired. Add peanut butter blend until smooth.
Blend almond milk, banana, cacao powder, and coconut flakes together in a blender.
Blend banana, almond milk, blueberries, dates, flax seeds, and cashew butter together in a blender on high speed until smooth.
Heat a skillet over medium-high heat. Heat tortillas 1 at a time, flipping until heated through, 1 to 2 minutes per side. Heat vegetable oil in a separate skillet over medium heat. Crack eggs gently into skillet in a single layer, being careful not to break the yolks. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese over the eggs, avoiding putting too much cheese on the egg yolks. Cook until eggs are set and cheese is melted, 3 to 5 minutes. Place tortillas on serving plates; spoon 1/4 cup salsa onto the center of each. Top each tortilla with tomato slices, a dollop of sour cream, and 2 cooked eggs. Season with salt and pepper.
Layer cucumber, pear, pineapple, white beans, parsley, and ginger in a blender; add water. Cover and blend mixture until smooth, adding more water for a thinner smoothie.
Place mango chunks, almond milk, banana, coconut cream, and vanilla extract in a blender; puree until smoothie is thick and smooth. Pour into a serving bowl. Top smoothie bowl with flaked coconut, goji berries, and chia seeds.
Combine orange juice, cucumber, carrots, apple, ice cubes, kale, lemon juice, flax seeds, chia seeds, and turmeric in a high-powered blender; blend until smooth.
Whisk together eggs and cheese until creamy. Fold in spinach and set aside. Heat oil over medium heat in an oven-proof skillet. Saute leek, carrot, and cayenne peppers until the leek is translucent, 4 to 5 minutes. Add chickpeas and tomatoes. Saute until warmed through, about 3 minutes. Add egg mixture to the skillet and cover. Cook the mixture undisturbed until the edges of the frittata have firmed and slightly browned, 4 to 5 minutes. Reduce heat to medium-low. Replace the cover but watch every so often until the whole frittata has firmed except the very middle. Take care to keep the heat source on medium-low to avoid burning bottom of frittata. Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Place the frittata under the broiler to firm and brown the top, 1 to 3 minutes. Allow to cool before serving. Top with red pepper flakes if desired. Serve warm or at room temperature with an ice cold glass of milk!
Beat eggs and milk together in a bowl. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Pour in eggs; cook and stir until eggs are set but still soft, about 3 minutes. Season with garlic powder and chili powder. Stir in Mexican cheese blend until melted, about 1 minute. Place tortilla chips on a large plate. Spoon eggs on top. Garnish with salsa, guacamole, sour cream, and black olives.
Spray the inside of a microwave-safe mug with cooking spray. Layer the tortillas in the mug. Place 4 bacon halves on top of the tortillas. Crack egg over bacon layer and top with remaining bacon halves. Cover mug with a paper towel. Cook in the microwave until egg is set and bacon is cooked, about 4 minutes. Remove tortilla bowls from mug.
Mix water, soy sauce, and sugar together in a small bowl until sugar is dissolved. Add egg and beat until egg mixture is combined. Heat skillet over medium heat until a drop of water evaporates almost immediately. Pour egg mixture into pan. Cook until the bottom of the omelet has solidified, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip and fold omelet into a square and transfer to a plate.
Mix eggs, water, soy sauce, and sugar in a bowl with a fork until combined. Heat a skillet over medium heat. Pour egg mixture into skillet and stir with a fork. Cook until omelet begins to set and liquid is no longer visible, 3 to 5 minutes. Fold in half twice.
Mix rice flour, sugar, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and turmeric together in a large bowl. Beat in coconut milk to make a thick batter. Slowly beat in water until batter is the consistency of a thin crepe batter. Heat 1 1/2 tablespoon oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add shallot and garlic; cook and stir until fragrant but not browning, 1 to 2 minutes. Add shrimp; saute until cooked through and opaque, 3 to 4 minutes. Season with fish sauce and salt. Transfer filling to a bowl. Preheat oven to 200 degrees F (95 degrees C). Wipe out skillet and reheat over medium heat. Add remaining 1 1/2 teaspoon oil. Stir crepe batter and pour 1/2 cup into the hot skillet, swirling to coat the bottom. Lay 3 or 4 of the cooked shrimp on the bottom half of the crepe. Top with a small handful of bean sprouts. Cook until batter looks set and edges start to brown, about 1 minute. Fold crepe over and slide onto an oven-safe plate. Place crepe in the preheated oven to keep warm. Repeat with remaining batter and filling. Serve lettuce leaves alongside filled crepes. Break off pieces of crepe and roll up in lettuce leaves to eat.
Whisk eggs, cinnamon, and vanilla extract together in a shallow bowl. Pour syrup into a skillet over low heat. Dip bread into egg mixture, allowing excess liquid to drip back into bowl. Wrap 4 slices bacon around each piece of bread. Dip bacon-wrapped bread back into egg mixture. Cook 1 piece bacon-wrapped bread in the syrup at a time until bacon is cooked to desired doneness, about 8 minutes per side.
Combine tea, spinach, kiwi, avocado, banana, and ginger in a blender. Blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease 2 loaf pans with cooking spray. Combine sugar and butter in a large bowl; beat with an electric mixer until creamy. Beat in coconut milk and eggs. Mix all-purpose flour, almond flour, baking powder, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Stir into the butter mixture until batter is thoroughly blended. Fold in coconut and raisins. Divide batter evenly between the greased loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 1 hour. Cool completely before slicing, about 30 minutes.
Grease 2 loaf pans with butter; coat bottoms and sides with 1 tablespoon cornmeal. Mix 1 1/2 cup bread flour, 1 1/2 cup white whole-wheat flour, yeast, and baking soda together in a large bowl. Combine milk, water, sugar, and salt in a saucepan over low heat; heat until mixture registers 125 degrees F (52 degrees C) on a thermometer, about 5 minutes. Stir warm milk mixture into the flour mixture; add remaining 1 1/2 cup bread flour and 1 1/2 cup white whole-wheat flour. Mix until dough comes together. Divide dough in half; place 1 piece in each loaf pan. Sprinkle remaining cornmeal on top. Cover and let rise in a warm place until doubled in size, about 1 hour. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Bake loaves in the preheated oven until golden brown, 20 to 25 minutes. Invert onto a wire rack and cool to room temperature, about 30 minutes.
Mix warm water and sugar together in a bowl until sugar is dissolved; stir in yeast. Set aside until a creamy foam starts to form, about 5 minutes. Combine bread flour, whole wheat flour, coconut oil, and salt in a food processor; pulse 4 times. Add chia seeds, wheat germ, flax seeds, millet, 1 tablespoon hemp seeds, 1 tablespoon sunflower seeds, and 1 tablespoon oats; pulse until incorporated. Pour yeast mixture over flour mixture in the food processor; process until a dough ball forms, about 1 minute. Turn dough into a well-oiled large bowl and cover with a damp towel; allow to rise in a warm area until doubled in size, about 1 hour. Punch dough down and knead a few times. Form dough into an oblong shape and place in a greased bread pan. Lightly press the remaining hemp seeds, sunflower seeds, and oats onto the loaf. Cover with a damp towel and let rise in a warm area for 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until cooked through and crust is lightly browned, about 30 minutes. Cool bread in the pan for 5 minutes before transferring to a wire rack to cool completely.
Combine almond milk, avocado, and honey in a blender; blend until smooth.
For the Poached Eggs: Fill pan with 2-inches of water and bring to a simmer, add vinegar. Gently crack eggs one at a time into the water, using a spoon to gather egg whites around egg yolks. Allow eggs to simmer just until whites are set, approximately 2 minutes. Remove eggs from water, and set aside. For the White Cheddar Hollandaise: While eggs are poaching begin hollandaise. In medium bowl whisk together egg yolks, lemon juice and water until light yellow. Set aside. In small saucepan melt butter over medium-low heat. Add 1 tablespoon melted butter at a time to egg yolk mixture, whisking constantly until fully incorporated. Pour mixture into saucepan and continue to whisk until warmed through and thickened. In last minute, whisk in white cheddar cheese until melted. Toast English muffins until golden brown. Top each with avocado and sausage patty. Top sausages with fresh poached egg and drizzle with white cheddar hollandaise. Serve immediately.
Combine almond milk, yogurt, ice cubes, blackberries, and banana in a blender; blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Place potatoes in a bowl and drizzle 1 tablespoon canola oil over potatoes; toss to coat. Spread potatoes onto a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes; flip potatoes and continue baking until tender and lightly browned, about 15 minutes more. Heat 1 tablespoon canola oil in a skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir red bell pepper and green bell pepper until softened, about 10 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Pour 1 tablespoon canola oil into the same skillet over medium-high heat; add onion and mushrooms. Cook and stir until onions are translucent and mushrooms are lightly browned, about 10 minutes. Transfer onion mixture to bowl with peppers. Cook and stir sausage in the same skillet over medium heat until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes. Add chipotle peppers and cook until heated through, 2 to 3 minutes. Layer potato rounds in a serving dish; top with sausage, pepper and onion mixture, Monterey Jack cheese, and cilantro.
Combine water, quinoa, cinnamon stick, and nutmeg in a saucepan; bring to a boil. Reduce heat and simmer, covered, until water is absorbed and quinoa is tender, about 15 minutes. Remove saucepan from heat and discard cinnamon stick. Mix apple, honey, and chia seeds into the quinoa. Let sit until flavors combine, about 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8-inch round pan. Place sun-dried tomatoes into a bowl of warm water until rehydrated, about 10 minutes. Drain and chop. Heat olive oil in a small skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion and garlic until onion is translucent, about 10 minutes. Add spinach; cook and stir until thawed and water is evaporated, about 5 minutes. Stir in mushrooms, sun-dried tomatoes, and feta cheese until well mixed. Whisk egg whites, skim milk, salt, pepper, and basil together in a bowl until very frothy. Carefully stir spinach mixture and 1 tablespoon Parmesan cheese into egg mixture. Pour into the prepared pan; top with remaining Parmesan cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until frittata is set and browned on top, about 25 minutes.
In a large bowl, stir together all ingredients (oats through walnuts). Fill 4 jars or plastic containers and seal with lids. (Optional: garnish the top with additional walnuts or apples.) Refrigerate overnight. Oats can be prepared up to four days in advance (great for planning ahead for a busy week).
Pour 1 cup coffee into an ice tray. Freeze until solid, 3 to 4 hours. Place 6 coffee ice cubes in a tall glass; add white chocolate syrup. Pour in cold coffee; add coffee creamer.
Combine 3 cups water, chia seeds, and walnuts in a bowl; stir to prevent clumps from forming. Let soak for 8 hours to overnight. Pour chia seed mixture into a blender; add 1 cup water, tahini, honey, and vanilla extract. Cover and blend until smooth; add reminding water.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Mix quinoa, steel-cut oats, almonds, cranberries, sunflower seeds, pumpkin seeds, coconut flakes, chia seeds, flax seeds, cocoa powder, and cinnamon together in a large bowl. Combine honey, coconut oil, vanilla extract, and stevia in a microwave-safe bowl. Heat in the microwave until melted together, 30 seconds to 1 minute. Pour honey mixture over the quinoa mixture; mix well to combine. Spread in an even layer on the baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, about 30 minutes. Let cool completely before breaking into pieces, about 30 minutes.
Combine buttermilk, egg, canola oil, and honey together in a large bowl. Mix buckwheat flour, quinoa flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl until blended. Incorporate flour mixture into the buttermilk mixture; stir until evenly mixed. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Drop batter, 1/4 cup per pancake, onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease 12 muffin cups with cooking spray. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir bratwurst in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain on a paper towel-lined plate. Season bratwurst with 2 teaspoons Italian seasoning and black pepper. Whisk eggs and milk together in a bowl; add 1 1/2 teaspoons Italian seasoning, garlic powder, seasoned salt, and garlic salt. Stir bratwurst and Mexican cheese blend into egg mixture. Pour egg mixture into the prepared muffin cups. Bake in the preheated oven until muffin cakes are set in the middle, 35 to 40 minutes.
Combine flour, oats, brown sugar, baking powder, cinnamon, and salt in a large bowl. Whisk milk, eggs, and applesauce together in a separate bowl; stir into flour mixture until batter is smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a muffin tin with cooking spray. Place bacon on a microwave-safe plate; cook in the microwave until slightly browned but still pliable, 2 to 3 minutes. Melt butter in a small skillet over medium heat. Add onion and garlic; cook and stir until onion is translucent, 3 to 5 minutes. Whisk eggs, garlic powder, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Stir in onion and garlic mixture. Sprinkle a few pieces of bacon in the bottom of each muffin cup. Cover with half of the egg mixture. Add a few more pieces of bacon; top with remaining egg mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 20 to 30 minutes. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese on top.
Bring water to a boil in a saucepan. Stir in oats; cook until tender, 10 to 20 minutes. Stir heavy cream, brown sugar, butter, and cinnamon into the oats; simmer for 5 minutes. Add diced banana and walnuts; cook for 1 to 2 minutes more. Remove oats from heat and stir in vanilla extract. Serve in bowls topped with sliced banana.
Combine milk, oats, yogurt, honey, peanut butter, flaxseed meal, vanilla extract, and salt in the bowl of a stand mixer. Mix on low speed until oats are soft, about 30 minutes. Pour mixture into 10 half-pint jars. Sprinkle 2 tablespoons cranberries and 2 tablespoons walnuts into each jar. Refrigerate before serving, 1 to 10 days.
Mix cornmeal, salt, and pepper together in a large resealable plastic bag; add potatoes, okra, and onion. Seal bag and shake until vegetables are coated with cornmeal mixture. Heat cooking oil in a large skillet over medium heat until shimmering but not smoking. Place vegetables in the hot oil and cook until potatoes are tender and okra and onion are browned, 10 to 12 minutes. Transfer cooked vegetables to a paper towel-lined plate using a slotted spoon.
In a blender, combine banana, raspberries, almond-coconut milk, stevia, coconut oil, and vanilla. Blend until smooth, adding a little more milk if needed. Pour smoothie into a bowl and top with berries, coconut, and chia seeds.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a rimmed baking sheet with parchment paper. Make a V-shaped cut in each roll, leaving the ends intact. Lift out V-shaped wedge. Hollow out rolls gently to make shallow bread bowls, being careful not to cut through the bottom or sides. Place bread bowls on the prepared baking sheet. Whisk eggs in a bowl. Add milk; whisk until well blended. Stir in green chile peppers, Cheddar cheese, pepper Jack cheese, paprika, and salt. Pour mixture slowly into the prepared rolls, spreading evenly with a spoon. Bake in the preheated oven until egg mixture is completely set and cheese is lightly browned, about 30 minutes. Cool for 3 minutes before serving.
Heat oven to 350 degrees F. Spray 2-quart baking dish with nonstick cooking spray. In large bowl, stir together oats, pumpkin pie spice and baking powder. Stir in pumpkin, milk, water, syrup, egg and vanilla extract until well combined. Stir in apples. Pour into baking dish. Sprinkle with pecans. Bake 30 minutes or until knife inserted near center comes out clean. Let stand 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Lightly grease a baking sheet with 1 teaspoon margarine. Sift all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, baking soda, cream of tartar, and salt together into a bowl; mix well. Add 2 tablespoons margarine and rub into flour mixture until crumbly. Pour milk over mixture and stir to form a soft, but not sticky dough. Dust your hands with flour and bring dough together, shaping into a ball. Place ball onto the baking sheet and flatten slightly. Cut an "x" on the top to divide it into quarters. Bake in the preheated oven until golden and risen, 20 to 25 minutes. The base should sound hollow when the loaf is lifted using a towel and you knock on it with your knuckles. Cool a wire rack.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a large 6-cup muffin tin with cooking spray. Mix potatoes, melted butter, salt, and pepper together in a large bowl. Divide potato mixture among muffin cups. Press to create a thin crust over the bottom and up the sides of each cup. Bake in the preheated oven until edges are a light golden brown and potatoes are tender, about 30 minutes. Crack an egg gently into each cup. Continue cooking until egg whites are set and yolk is runny, about 6 minutes. Remove from the oven; cover eggs with provolone cheese. Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Toss prosciutto with maple syrup and pepper in a small bowl. Spread out on a small baking sheet lined with aluminum foil. Place muffin tin and baking sheet under the preheated broiler. Broil until cheese is melted and prosciutto is crisp, about 1 minute. Transfer egg baskets to a serving plate. Chop prosciutto and sprinkle on top.
Mix sorghum flour, almond milk, egg white, orange juice, stevia sweetener, orange zest, and nutmeg together in a bowl. Fold cranberries gently into the batter. Spray a large skillet with cooking spray; heat over medium-high heat. Reduce heat to medium; pour 1/4 cup batter into the skillet. Cook until bubbles start to form and bottom is lightly browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook for 2 to 3 minutes more. Transfer to a cooling rack. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Cook breakfast sausage according to package directions; set aside. In a skillet, brown the hash browns in butter until crisp. Spread hash browns into the bottom of a greased 9-in. deep dish pie plate (about 1-3/4 in. deep) Sprinkle cheese into center of the pie plate. Arrange breakfast sausage around the edge of the pie plate at a slight angle; using cheese to help hold up the links. In a bowl, combine the eggs, cream, onion powder, salt and pepper; pour into pie plate. Arrange tomato slices on top of quiche; sprinkle with chives. Cover sausage at edge of quiche with foil to prevent overbrowning. Bake for 40-45 minutes or until eggs are set.  Let rest 5 minutes before cutting.
Mix water and ghee together in a bowl; beat in eggs until mixture is frothy. Add tapioca flour, coconut flour, and sea salt; whisk until batter is smooth. Heat an 8-inch nonstick skillet over medium-low heat. Spoon 2 tablespoons batter into the hot skillet, swirling the skillet to cover the bottom evenly. Cook for about 30 seconds; flip and cook other side for 30 seconds. Transfer to a plate and repeat with remaining batter.
In large bowl, combine flour, oats, baking powder and salt; mix well. In separate medium bowl, combine milk, egg and oil; blend well. Add liquid ingredients to dry ingredients all at once; stir just until dry ingredients are moistened (do not over mix). Add one of the stir-in options, if desired; mix gently. Heat skillet over medium-high heat (or preheat electric skillet or griddle to 375 degrees F). Lightly grease skillet. For each pancake, pour 1/4 cup batter into hot skillet. Turn when tops are covered with bubbles and edges look cooked. Turn only once. Serve & enjoy!
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Mix rice flour, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk milk, eggs, olive oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl; add to rice flour mixture and whisk until no lumps remain. Let sit for 1 to 2 minutes. Pour batter into waffle iron, working in batches, and cook according to manufacturer's instructions.
Whisk eggs and heavy cream together in a bowl until smooth. Melt coconut oil in a skillet over medium heat. Pour in egg mixture and cover skillet with a lid. Cook until eggs begin to set, about 5 minutes. Fold omelet in half; cover and continue cooking until firm, about 5 minutes more. Transfer to a plate using a flat spatula.
Preheat oven to 200 degrees F (95 degrees C). Wrap tortillas in aluminum foil; place in the preheated oven. Cook bacon in a skillet over medium heat until browned, about 5 minutes. Remove bacon from skillet. Cook and stir refried beans in bacon grease until heated through, about 1 minute. Cover beans and remove from heat. Whisk together eggs and egg whites in a bowl until uniform, about 1 minute. Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat, add egg mixture. Cook and stir until almost solid, about 2 minutes; stir in Cheddar cheese and remove from heat. Top each warm tortilla with 2 tablespoons of refried beans, 2 bacon strips, half of the eggs, 1 tablespoon of salsa, and 1 tablespoon of sour cream. Roll tortillas into burritos.
In a skillet over medium-high heat, saute the onion in the oil until soft and translucent, about 4 minutes. Add the can of corned beef hash and black beans. Cook until the mixture is heated throughout and slightly crispy, 4 to 6 minutes. Remove from heat. Fill a large saucepan with 2 to 3 inches of water and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to medium-low, pour in vinegar, and keep the water at a gentle simmer. Crack an egg into a small bowl then gently slip egg into the simmering water, holding the bowl just above the surface of water. Repeat with the remaining eggs. Cook eggs until the whites are firm and the yolks have thickened but are not hard, 2 1/2 to 3 minutes. Remove the eggs from the water with a slotted spoon, dab on a kitchen towel to remove excess water, and place onto a warm plate. Cut the arepas in half horizontally. Distribute corned beef hash mixture on the bottom halves of the arepas. Top with slices of tomato and avocado and a poached egg. Close with arepa tops and serve.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a 9-inch baking pan with parchment paper; grease parchment paper with cooking spray. Whisk flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl. Combine buttermilk, egg, butter, and vanilla extract together in a small bowl, beating to break up the egg. Add flour mixture; stir until just combined. Fold chocolate chips gently into the batter. Allow batter to rest for 5 minutes. Combine brownie mix, oil, eggs, and water in a large bowl; whisk together until smooth. Pour 1/2 cup of the brownie batter into a squeeze bottle, pastry bag with a small round tip, or large resealable plastic bag with corner snipped off. Reserve remaining batter. Heat a large nonstick skillet over medium-low heat. Drop 1/3 cup pancake batter into the skillet, shaking skillet to spread batter evenly. Drop 5 nickel-size dollops of brownie batter over the pancake; swirl using a skewer or knife edge. Cook until edges are dry, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook until set on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes. Repeat with remaining batters. Pour reserved brownie batter into the prepared pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 28 to 30 minutes. Cool on a wire rack before slicing.
Combine mangoes, ice cubes, vanilla extract, and sugar in a blender; pour in milk. Blend until liquefied.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. In medium nonstick pan, heat vegetable oil over medium heat. Add bacon and cook until crispy. Transfer bacon to paper towel-lined plate and reserve. Keep bacon fat in pan. To pan with bacon fat, add mushrooms and cook until well browned. Remove and reserve. Add onions and cook until softened; add garlic and cook for additional 2 minutes. Add red pepper flakes and spinach. Cook until spinach just starts to wilt. Return bacon and mushrooms to spinach mixture and add eggs whisked with 2 tablespoons milk, stirring to combine. Pour mixture into ovenproof serving dishes. Top with smoked Gouda and place in oven. Bake for 8 to 10 minutes, or until eggs are just set.
Combine bananas, pineapple, almond butter, and chia seeds in a blender; add water. Blend until smooth.
Combine banana, yogurt, almond milk, oats, honey, and cinnamon in a blender; blend until smooth.
Place banana in a serving bowl; spoon yogurt over the top. Sprinkle muesli over yogurt. Garnish with strawberries and blueberries.
Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add tortilla squares; cook and stir until crispy, about 5 minutes. Whisk eggs, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Stir in Cheddar cheese. Pour egg and cheese mixture into the skillet; cook and until eggs are firm, about 5 minutes. Pour enchilada sauce on top.
Heat 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add onion and parsley stems; cook and stir until onion is translucent, about 5 minutes. Add zucchini and salt; cook and stir until softened, about 5 minutes. Stir zucchini blossoms into the skillet. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and cook for 10 minutes. Uncover skillet and cook until moisture evaporates, 2 to 3 minutes more. Whisk parsley leaves, eggs, Parmesan cheese, Pecorino Romano cheese, and mint together in a bowl. Fold in zucchini mixture from the skillet. Mix well; season with salt and pepper. Heat remaining 1 tablespoon oil in a large skillet over high heat. Pour in egg mixture and spread evenly across the skillet. Cook for 2 minutes. Prick surface in several places with a fork. Reduce heat to low and cook for 5 minutes. Remove from heat and cover; let stand until top is just set, about 5 minutes. Invert frittata onto a large plate and slide back into the skillet. Cook over low heat until second side is set, about 5 minutes more. Remove from heat and let stand 5 to 10 minutes before serving.
Cook egg whites in a nonstick skillet over medium heat until opaque, about 4 minutes. Toast English muffins. Divide cooked egg whites between 2 muffin bottoms. Top with spinach, 1 tomato slice, and muffin tops.
Combine Granny Smith apple, spinach, blueberries, soy milk, and ice cubes in a blender; blend until smooth.
Combine milk, oats, lemon zest, and vanilla extract in a large bowl. Cover and refrigerate until oats have absorbed milk, 8 hours to overnight. Stir apricots, pine nuts, and agave nectar into the oatmeal.
In a large bowl, stir together all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour,  Carnation Breakfast Essentials(R) Rich Milk Chocolate Light Start(TM) Rich Milk Chocolate Powdered Drink Mix , cinnamon, baking powder, and salt. In another bowl, whisk together eggs, milk, oil, and vanilla until combined. Add egg mixture all at once to flour mixture. Stir just until moistened (batter should be slightly lumpy). Stir in chocolate pieces. For thinner pancakes, add in additional milk until desired consistency. Pour 1/4 cup portions of batter onto a hot, lightly greased griddle or heavy skillet. Cook over medium heat for 1 to 2 minutes on each side or until pancakes are golden brown; turn over when surfaces are bubbly and edges are slightly dry. Serve warm. If desired, dust pancakes with powdered sugar or serve with yogurt or fresh fruit.
Combine flour, brown sugar, 2 teaspoons cinnamon, cream of tartar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a bowl with a whisk. Combine buttermilk, egg, butter, and vanilla extract in a small bowl. Beat to break up the egg. Pour into the flour mixture and stir until batter is foamy and just combined. Whisk white sugar and 1 teaspoon cinnamon together in a small bowl. Heat a large non-stick griddle over medium-low heat. Pour 1/3 cup batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Brush pancakes with the 5 tablespoons butter. Sprinkle each with 1 teaspoon of the cinnamon-sugar mixture. Top with whipped cream.
In a large bowl (using a hand beater) whip the Bruce's Yams Cut Sweet Potatoes until creamy. Add the eggs, parsley, flour, salt, pepper and onion; stir well to combine. Press all the excess moisture out of the grated Russet potatoes and add to sweet potato mixture. Stir ingredients to blend well. Heat peanut oil to 375 degrees F in an electric skillet (or a heavy skillet over medium-high heat). Pour in 1/3 cup potato mixture at a time, flattening each with the back of a wooden spoon. Fry until crisp and golden brown on both sides, about 3 minutes per side. Serve with sour cream and applesauce on the side.
Place Bruce's Yam Cut Sweet Potatoes, yogurt, orange juice and honey in a power blender and process until smooth. Transfer to a cereal or pasta bowl(s) and arrange kiwi, banana, blueberries, sunflower seeds and golden raisins over the top.
Whisk coconut flour, erythritol, oat fiber, baking powder, xanthan gum, and salt together in a bowl, breaking up any lumps in the coconut flour. Preheat a griddle or pan over medium-low heat and lightly oil the surface. Mix eggs, butter, water, cream, vinegar, and vanilla extract into the bowl with the coconut flour mixture. Stir well to combine; batter will be thicker than regular pancake batter. Scoop 1/4 cup batter at a time onto the preheated griddle, leaving space between each pancake and smoothing the tops slightly. Cook until bubbles form, edges begin to dry, and the bottom is browned, 2 to 5 minutes. Flip pancakes carefully using a thin spatula; continue cooking until firm and browned on the second side, about 1 minute more.
Heat a lightly buttered skillet over medium-high heat. Mix almond milk, eggs, sorghum flour, melted butter, and salt in a blender until the batter is homogenous. Pour 1/4 cup batter onto the hot pan and swirl quickly to form a thin layer. Cook until there is no liquid on the surface and edges start to lift up from the pan, 2 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook for a few seconds on the other side. Transfer to a plate. Repeat with remaining batter to make about 8 crepes.
Beat eggs in a large bowl until smooth. Add milk, flour, sugar, vanilla extract, nutmeg, and salt; whisk until just combined. Stir in 1/2 cup melted butter until batter is very thin and slightly lumpy. Heat a nonstick griddle over medium-high heat. Brush generously with 1 teaspoon butter. Pour batter onto the griddle to make 6-inch pancakes. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 30 seconds to 1 minute. Flip and cook until the other side is dry, 30 seconds to 1 minute. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place oats in a multi-functional pressure cooker (such as Instant Pot(R)). Sprinkle with pumpkin pie spice and salt. Add water, milk, pumpkin puree, and cranberries. Stir lightly. Close and lock the lid. Set to Manual; select high pressure according to manufacturer's instructions. Set timer for 3 minutes. Allow 10 to 15 minutes for pressure to build. Keep warm for 5 minutes more after cooking time is complete. Release pressure carefully using the quick-release method according to manufacturer's instructions, about 5 minutes. Unlock and remove lid. Stir in honey; divide oatmeal into 4 bowls. Top each serving with 1 tablespoon walnuts and 1 1/2 teaspoons brown sugar.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 3-quart baking dish. Combine hash browns, Cheddar cheese, onion, bacon, green bell pepper, and parsley in a bowl. Transfer to the prepared baking dish. Mix eggs and cottage cheese together in a blender until smooth. Pour evenly over the potato mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned, about 30 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 12-cup muffin tin with coconut oil. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add cauliflower, onion, and garlic. Cook and stir until cauliflower is slightly translucent and garlic and onions are soft, 6 to 8 minutes. Place in a bowl and let cool. Place cottage cheese, egg whites, hot sauce, parsley, oregano, and garlic powder in a blender; blend until smooth. Pour into the bowl of cauliflower mixture; mix completely. Spoon mixture evenly into the greased muffin cups and press down so pancakes are even and flat. Bake in the preheated oven until edges and tops are golden and crispy, about 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 225 degrees F (110 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Combine oats, almonds, coconut, sesame seeds, cinnamon, and salt in a large bowl.
                                    Watch Now Beat egg whites in a glass, metal, or ceramic bowl until stiff peaks form. Beat in vanilla extract. Fold egg whites into the oat mixture. Spread on the prepared baking sheet.
                                    Watch Now Bake in the preheated oven, stirring every 20 minutes, until granola is crispy, about 1 hour.
                                    Watch Now
In a large bowl, stir together flour, 1/4 cup graham cracker crumbs, baking powder, and salt. Make a well in the center of the flour mixture; set aside. In a medium bowl, beat eggs lightly; stir in milk, butter or oil, honey, and vanilla. Add egg mixture all at once to the flour mixture. Stir just until moistened (batter should be slightly lumpy). Add batter to a lightly greased waffle baker preheated according to manufacturer's directions, spreading batter slightly toward the edges. Close lid quickly; do not open until done. Bake according to manufacturer's directions. When done, use a fork to lift waffle off grid and place on a wire rack. Repeat with remaining batter. Spread each waffle with 1 tablespoon HERSHEY'S Spreads Chocolate. Top each waffle with 1 tablespoon HERSHEY'S S'mores Baking Pieces. Press 2 waffles together to make a sandwich, with all the filling in the middle. Return to the preheated waffle iron, lining up waffle pattern if possible. Cook in waffle iron about 2 minutes more, or until filling is heated through. Serve warm waffles in tall stacks topped with remaining HERSHEY'S S'mores Baking Pieces. Sprinkle with additional graham cracker crumbles and/or colored sprinkles, if desired. Serve with desired syrups.
Combine oats and milk in a large bowl or measuring cup. Cover and let soak in the refrigerator until much of the milk is absorbed, at least 8 hours and up to 12 hours. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Coat an 8-inch square baking pan with cooking spray. Stir egg, maple syrup, oil, vanilla extract, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt into the soaked oats until well combined. Spread the mixture into the prepared pan. Top with mixed berries. Bake the oatmeal until it springs back when touched, 25 to 30 minutes. Let cool in the pan for 10 minutes. Cut into twelve 2x2-1/2-inch bars. Loosen and remove with a flexible spatula. Serve warm.
Combine water, oats, almond milk, brown sugar, cinnamon, nutmeg, ginger, and cloves in a multi-functional pressure cooker (such as Instant Pot(R)). Close and lock the lid. Select high pressure according to manufacturer's instructions; set timer for 10 minutes. Allow 10 to 15 minutes for pressure to build. Let pressure release naturally for 10 minutes. Finish releasing pressure carefully using the quick-release method according to manufacturer's instructions, about 5 minutes. Unlock and remove the lid. Stir with a silicone spatula until oats are combined and thick.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch pie dish with cooking spray. Line the prepared pie dish with puff pastry, covering base and sides. Trim excess pastry. Brush bottom with Dijon mustard. Melt butter in a saucepan over medium heat. Add chopped onions and cook until tender, about 5 minutes. Add garlic and cook 1 minute more. Mix in broccoli; cook 3 more minutes. Whisk heavy cream, eggs, salt, nutmeg, black pepper, and Italian seasoning in a bowl. Layer broccoli mixture over the puff pastry and top with Brie cheese slices. Pour in egg mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until set and golden, about 30 minutes.
Prepare a heat-proof container of water with a sous vide cooker. Set temperature to 150 degrees F (66 degrees C). Fill a bowl with enough ice water to cover eggs. Fill a saucepan with water and bring to a boil. Add eggs to the boiling water and cook until whites are set, exactly 5 minutes. Move the eggs to the ice bath for at least 1 minute to stop the cooking. Place eggs into the sous vide water bath; set timer for 40 minutes. Serve immediately or refrigerate and reheat for a few minutes in the sous vide or a bowl of hot water.
Mix egg whites and paprika together in a bowl. Heat olive oil in a small skillet over medium heat. Pour in egg white mixture; cook for 1 minute. Place basil leaves over egg whites. Cook until egg white starts to firm up, about 1 minute. Spread avocado on top and sprinkle with feta cheese. Cook for 3 minutes more. Fold in half to form the omelet.
Melt 1/2 the butter in a skillet over medium heat. Add cucumber, carrots, tomato, and garlic. Cook and stir until vegetables are tender, about 10 minutes. Add rice and ham; cook and stir until heated through and well combined, about 10 minutes. Transfer rice mixture to a bowl. Beat eggs, salt, and pepper together in a medium bowl. Heat remaining butter in the same skillet over medium heat. Pour in the egg mixture; swirl to coat the bottom of the skillet. Cook until edges are mostly set, about 2 minutes. Lift the omelet with a spatula as the center rises; tilt the skillet so that uncooked eggs run to the center of the pan. Cook until set, 2 to 4 minutes. Place the rice mixture on top of the omelet. Fold omelet over the rice using a spatula and wrap into a cocoon shape. Place on a plate; sprinkle parsley on top.
Heat a skillet over medium heat. Cook sausage until browned, about 5 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Heat oil in the same skillet over medium-high heat. Saute mushrooms, onion, and red bell pepper with 1/2 the salt and pepper until vegetables are tender, about 5 minutes. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Line a 12-cup muffin tin with paper liners. Whisk eggs with remaining salt and pepper in a large bowl. Add shredded Mexican cheese blend, spinach, milk, chives, and the sauteed sausage and vegetables. Fill each muffin cup no more than 3/4 full with the egg mixture using an ice cream scoop. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, 20 to 25 minutes.
Combine water and milk in a saucepan and bring to a boil. Add oats and reduce heat to medium. Add maple syrup, cinnamon, and salt. Stir to mix well. Cook, stirring frequently, until oatmeal is softened to your preference, about 5 minutes. Place 1 tablespoon peanut butter in the bottom of a serving bowl. Pour cooked oatmeal in; top with remaining peanut butter and raspberry preserves.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch pie dish with cooking spray. Line the prepared pie dish with puff pastry, covering base and sides. Trim excess pastry. Brush bottom with Dijon mustard. Melt butter in a saucepan over medium heat. Add chopped green onions and cook until tender, about 5 minutes. Add garlic and cook for 1 minute more. Mix in chicken, and cook for 1 minute more. Whisk eggs, heavy cream, salt, nutmeg, ground black pepper, and Italian seasoning together in a bowl. Layer 1/2 of the Gouda cheese over the puff pastry and top with chicken mixture. Pour in egg mixture. Sprinkle the remaining Gouda cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until set and golden, about 25 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Spread potato nuggets on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven for 8 minutes. Turn potato nuggets and bake until crispy, 8 minutes more. While potatoes bake, combine eggs, salsa, and milk in a bowl and whisk to combine. Heat a skillet over medium heat and coat with cooking spray. Add egg mixture. Scramble until partially set, about 2 minutes. Add green onion and bell pepper. Cook until eggs are set, about 5 minutes more. Transfer eggs to a plate. Place cooked potato nuggets in a large bowl and top with scrambled eggs and grated Cheddar cheese. Add salt and pepper.
Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil. Halve poblano lengthwise; remove seeds and membranes. Put cut sides down on the prepared baking sheet; roast until skins are charred, about 20 minutes. Wrap foil around pepper halves and let stand until cool enough to handle, 20 to 30 minutes. Meanwhile, brown sausage in a large skillet over medium heat, stirring to break up lumps, about 5 minutes. Transfer to a plate; drain grease. Return the skillet to medium heat; melt 1 tablespoon butter with the oil. Stir in bell peppers, sweet potato, onion, chili powder, cumin, red pepper flakes, and garlic. Cook, stirring occasionally, until vegetables are tender and starting to brown, 20 to 25 minutes. Peel and chop the poblano; add to the skillet, along with sausage, and 1/4 teaspoon each salt and black pepper. Cook until heated through, 1 to 2 minutes. Transfer to a serving platter and keep warm. Rinse the skillet, return to heat, and melt remaining 1 tablespoon butter. Crack eggs into the skillet; sprinkle with remaining 1/4 teaspoon each salt and black pepper. Reduce heat to low and cook until whites are completely set and yolks begin to thicken, 3 to 4 minutes. Top hash with eggs and serve with salsa, cheese, and cilantro.
Beat eggs in a medium bowl until yellow and frothy. Add garlic, salt, and pepper. Toss spinach, Muenster cheese, and onion together in a small bowl. Divide evenly among the cavities of a silicone egg mold. Pour beaten eggs into each cavity, filling each 3/4 full. Cover mold with aluminum foil. Pour 1/2 cup water into a multi-functional pressure cooker (such as Instant Pot(R)). Place egg mold inside. Close and lock the lid, sealing the vent. Select Steam function; set timer for 13 minutes. Release pressure naturally according to manufacturer's instructions, 10 to 40 minutes.
Combine ice cubes, zucchini, banana, and orange juice in a blender. Blend until smooth.
Preheat the air fryer to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Unfold pastry sheet on a flat surface and cut into 4 squares. Place 2 pastry squares in the air fryer basket and cook 6 to 8 minutes. Remove basket from air fryer. Use a metal tablespoon to press each square gently to form an indentation. Place 1 tablespoon of Cheddar cheese and 1 tablespoon ham in each hole and pour 1 egg on top of each. Return basket to air fryer. Cook to desired doneness, about 6 minutes more. Remove tarts from basket and let cool 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining pastry squares, cheese, ham, and eggs. Garnish tarts with chives.
Cut each slice of bread into thirds to make sticks. Cut a piece of parchment paper to fit the bottom of the air fryer basket. Preheat air fryer to 360 degrees F (180 degrees C). Stir together eggs, milk, vanilla extract, cinnamon, and nutmeg in a bowl until well combined. Dip each piece of bread into egg mixture, making sure each piece is well submerged. Shake each bread stick to remove excess liquid and place in a single layer in the air fryer basket. Cook in batches, if necessary, to avoid overcrowding the fryer. Cook for 5 minutes, turn bread pieces, and cook for an additional 5 minutes.
Place flour, 1 tablespoon plus 2 teaspoons sugar, green tea powder, yeast, and salt in a mixing bowl and mix by hand. Make a well in the center and pour in 1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons milk and beaten egg. Mix to form a soft dough. Turn dough out onto a lightly floured work surface. Knead until dough becomes smooth and is no longer sticky, about 5 minutes. Knead and mix 1 tablespoon plus 2 teaspoons butter into the dough. Continue to knead until dough is smooth and elastic and no longer sticks to the work surface, about 15 minutes. Smooth dough into a ball and place in a mixing bowl. Cover with plastic wrap and let dough rise until doubled in size, about 1 hour. Lightly grease a loaf pan. Remove dough from the bowl and punch out accumulated air. Place on a lightly floured surface and use a rolling pin to roll dough into a large rectangle slightly wider than the length of the loaf pan and as long as possible. Roll dough tightly, Swiss-roll style. Pinch dough to seal the seam tightly. Place seam-side down in the prepared pan and cover with plastic wrap. Let dough rise a second time until it fills 80% of the pan, 45 to 60 minutes. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, 30 to 35 minutes. Remove bread from pan immediately and let cool completely before slicing, about 30 minutes.
Cut a 2x3-inch oval out of the center of each slice of bread. Reserve the bread centers for another use. Melt butter in a large nonstick skillet over medium heat. Add bread to the skillet. Cook over medium heat, about 2 minutes, or until the bottom of the bread is golden brown. Carefully flip bread slices. Arrange 2 avocado slices on the perimeter of the hole in each bread slice. Break eggs into a custard cup, 1 at a time, then slip the egg into the center of each circle. Season eggs with salt and ground black pepper. Cook over medium heat for 2 minutes. Sprinkle Gruyere cheese on over toast and eggs. Cover and cook for 1 1/2 to 2 minutes more or until egg is desired doneness and cheese is melted. If desired, sprinkle with freshly cracked black pepper.
Combine soy milk, oats, jam, almonds, coconut, and almond extract in a 12-ounce mason jar. Cover tightly with a lid and shake vigorously. Refrigerate until oats are hydrated, 4 hours to overnight.
Combine spinach, orange juice, carrot, protein powder, and ginger in a blender. Blend, adding frozen blueberries gradually and stirring if needed, until smooth.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch pie plate with cooking spray. Melt butter in a medium cast iron skillet over medium heat. Add onion; cook and stir until softened and translucent, about 5 minutes. Stir in cherry tomatoes until slightly softened, about 3 minutes. Add mushrooms and cook until tender, about 3 minutes. Mix in spinach; cook for 1 minute more. Whisk cream, eggs, salt, pepper, and nutmeg together in a bowl. Spread 1/2 of the Gouda cheese in the prepared pie plate and top with spinach mixture. Cover with egg mixture and sprinkle the remaining Gouda cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set and top is golden, about 25 minutes.
Combine almond milk, bananas, oats, water, chia seeds, and cinnamon in a jar or airtight container; stir together. Cover and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Place oat mixture in a saucepan over low heat and gently cook for about 5 minutes. Divide between 2 bowls and top with blueberries, blackberries, and nectarine.
Combine canned coconut milk, coconut milk beverage, brown sugar, coconut oil, and coconut extract in a saucepan. Heat over low heat until hot. Use an immersion blender to froth milk mixture until foamy. Pour coconut milk mixture into a large mug, holding foam back with the back of a spoon. Pour in coffee and add foam on top.
Combine butter, cream, eggs, and vanilla extract in a bowl. Combine coconut flour, stevia, baking powder, and salt in a second bowl. Add dry mixture to the cream mixture and mix to combine. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Run carrots, celery, beet, green bell pepper, apple, and ginger through a juicer according to manufacturer's instructions.
Blend yogurt, peaches, raspberries, and honey together in a blender until smooth; add ice, pineapple, watermelon, and banana. Blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch square pan. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Stir corn, mushrooms, 1/2 cup Monterey Jack cheese, and 1/2 can French-fried onions into sausage until well combined. Pour mixture into the prepared square pan. Whisk flour, milk, eggs, oil, and chili powder together in a bowl until smooth; pour over sausage mixture. Bake in the preheated oven for 30 minutes. Top mixture with remaining 1/2 cup Monterey Jack cheese and 1/2 can French-fried onions. Bake until cheese is melted, about 3 more minutes.
Cook ground bison and onion over medium heat in a large skillet until ground bison is brown and onion is tender. Drain off fat. Stir in cumin, salt, coriander, cayenne pepper, and water. Cook and stir for 2 minutes. Whisk eggs and milk in a medium bowl. Add to ground bison mixture in skillet. As the mixture sets, run a spatula around the edge of the skillet, lifting egg mixture so uncooked portion flows underneath. Continue cooking and lifting for 2 minutes or until egg mixture is almost set. Evenly divide ground bison mixture between taco shells. Sprinkle with cheese. Serve with Pineapple Salsa. Pineapple Salsa: Stir together pineapple, bell pepper, onion, cilantro, lime juice, jalapeno pepper (if using), and salt in a medium bowl. Refrigerate for up to 24 hours.
Place potato into a large pot and cover with salted water; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low and simmer until tender, 10 to 15 minutes. Drain. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir beef, onion, red bell pepper, and garlic in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Add potato, salsa, chili powder, cumin, seasoned salt, and pepper to ground beef mixture; cook and stir over low heat until heated through, 3 to 5 minutes. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat; crack eggs into the hot oil. Cook until lightly browned, about 3 minutes per side. Place tostada shells on a serving plate; top each with beef-potato mixture. Layer 1 egg onto each tostada; sprinkle with cilantro.
Blend 1 cup soy milk with blueberries in a blender until the mixture has the consistency of a smoothie, about 1 minute. Stir together the oats, coconut, and pecans in a large bowl. Stir in the blueberry mixture, yogurt, and the remaining soy milk. Cover; refrigerate for at least 4 hours or up to overnight.
Combine milk, flour, eggs, sugar, cinnamon, baking soda, and salt in a large bowl; beat with an electric mixer until smooth and creamy. Mix in apples. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls into the pan and cook until the edges are dry and the bottom is browned, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Dust pancakes with confections' sugar.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Stir yogurt, coffee powder, and vanilla together in a bowl until smooth. Fold oats into the yogurt mixture. Add flour, baking powder, and cinnamon; stir. Mix almonds and cranberries into the batter. Spread coconut onto a 9x13-inch baking dish. Bake coconut in oven until lightly toasted, about 4 minutes. Spread batter atop the coconut without stirring coconut into the batter. Bake until the batter is browned on top, 15 to 18 minutes. Cool on stove top before moving to refrigerator to chill. Once the bars are cooled down, flip them over so they won't become too soggy. Cut into 12 bars.
Place a steamer insert into a saucepan and fill with water to just below the bottom of the steamer. Bring water to a boil. Add asparagus, cover, and steam until tender, 2 to 4 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray 6 muffin cups with cooking spray. Whisk milk, eggs, maple syrup, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Place 1 asparagus half and about 1 teaspoon onion into each of the prepared muffin cups. Pour about 1/4 cup egg mixture into each muffin cup; sprinkle each with Swiss cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until frittatas are golden and puffed, about 25 minutes. Remove promptly and let cool only a few minutes, as they will deflate, like a souffle.
Blend honeydew, honey, and sugar in a blender on low speed until smooth, about 1 1/2 minutes.
Blend ice, banana, pineapple, coconut milk, soy milk, agave nectar, flax seed, and vanilla extract in a blender until smooth. Pour smoothie into a tall glass.
Blend strawberries, soy milk, banana, agave nectar, flax seed, and vanilla extract in a blender until creamy.
Run tomatoes, carrots, celery, spring greens, kale, radishes, lemon with rind, and peeled lemon through a juicer according to  manufacturer's instructions.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Sprinkle cornmeal onto a baking sheet or spray with cooking spray. Combine 1 1/2 cup all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, oats, brown sugar, baking soda, and salt together in a large bowl. Cut butter into flour mixture using a pastry blender or your fingers until mixture resembles coarse crumbs. Stir buttermilk into flour mixture using a fork just until dough is blended; knead 5 times in the bowl. Turn dough onto a floured surface; knead dough using floured hands 8 to 10 times; shape into a 6- to 8-inch loaf. Place loaf on the prepared baking sheet and sprinkle about 1 teaspoon flour over loaf. Cut a long 'x' over the top of the loaf using a serrated knife. Bake in the preheated oven until bread is golden, sounds hollow when top is tapped, and internal temperature is 190 degrees F (88 degrees C), 45 to 50 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 11x7-inch baking dish. Melt margarine in a skillet over medium-high heat; saute mushrooms, onion, and garlic in hot butter until the onion is clear, 5 to 7 minutes. Beat eggs, bread crumbs, salt, hot sauce, pepper, oregano, and garlic salt together in a bowl. Stir mushroom mixture, artichokes, and cheese into the egg mixture; pour into the prepared baking dish. Bake in preheated oven until the egg is set in the middle, 35 to 40 minutes. Cool slightly in baking dish before cutting into squares to serve.
Blend soy milk, yogurt, bananas, strawberries, flax seed, and chia seeds in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place squash on a baking sheet. Grease a pie dish. Bake squash in the preheated oven until easily pierced with a fork, 45 minutes to 1 hour. Cool squash until able to touch, about 15 minutes; cut in half, remove seeds, and scoop meat into a bowl. Mix squash, onion, turkey, eggs, pumpkin pie spice, and salt together in a bowl until smooth; pour into prepared pie dish. Bake in the oven until edges become lighter in color and middle is set, 35 to 45 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Whisk pumpkin, brown sugar, white sugar, canola oil, and eggs together in a bowl until smooth. Sift flour, cinnamon, nutmeg, baking soda, baking powder, salt, allspice, and cloves together in a separate bowl. Stir flour mixture, a little at a time, into pumpkin mixture until batter is smooth; fold in quinoa, walnuts, and cranberries. Pour batter into prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until top of loaf springs back when lightly touched, 50 to 60 minutes.
Pulse walnuts in a food processor or blender until finely crushed; transfer to a large bowl. Whisk oat flour, baking soda, cinnamon, cream of tartar, and salt with the walnuts. Puree carrots in a food processor; transfer to a separate bowl. Whisk orange juice, water, egg, and walnut oil with the pureed carrots until smooth; stir into the dry ingredients to make a rich and hearty batter. Set batter aside to rest for 5 minutes. Heat a small amount of canola oil in a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Tilt skillet to coat cooking surface with oil. Stir the batter again with the whisk. Use a 1/4-cup measuring cup to spoon out the batter, but do not fill the measuring cup.  Drop small amounts of the batter into the skillet. Cook pancakes until the edges start to look dry, 3 to 5 minutes; turn and continue cooking until the other side is browned, 3 to 5 minutes more.
Blend mango, water, tahini, and lime juice together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Butter a 9x13-inch casserole dish. Heat butter in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onions and mushrooms until softened and tender, about 10 minutes. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on paper towels, reserving 1 tablespoon bacon grease. Crumble bacon. Beat milk, eggs, and reserved 1 tablespoon bacon grease together in a bowl; fold in potatoes until evenly mixed. Stir onion-mushroom mixture and sun-dried tomatoes into potato mixture; season with salt and pepper. Pour potato mixture, including all the liquid, into the prepared casserole dish. Sprinkle bacon and 1 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese over potato mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until potatoes are tender and cheese is melted, about 55 minutes. Sprinkle remaining 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese over potato mixture and continue baking until melted, about 5 minutes more. Serve with sour cream.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Press puff pastry sheet into the bottom and up the sides of a shallow casserole dish or 8-inch pie plate. Beat milk, eggs, spinach, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Spread a thin layer of cheese onto the pastry crust in the baking dish; sprinkle ham over the top. Pour egg mixture over ham and sprinkle remaining cheese over the top. Arrange tomato slices over the cheese. Bake in the preheated oven for 20 minutes. Reduce oven temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and continue baking until crust is browned, about 30 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Press pie pastry into an 8-inch pie dish. Heat a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir bacon for 3 minutes. Add onion, spinach, and courgette to bacon; cook and stir until onion and courgette are tender, spinach is wilted, and bacon is fully cooked, 5 to 10 minutes. Transfer bacon-courgette mixture to the pie pastry. Beat milk, eggs, salt, and pepper together in a bowl; pour into pastry crust. Top egg mixture with mozzarella cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until cheese is browned and quiche bounces back when touched, about 35 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Arrange bagels onto a baking sheet with the cut sides up. Arrange bacon pieces atop the bagel halves. Spoon gravy lightly atop the bacon. Sprinkle mozzarella cheese over the gravy. Bake in preheated oven until the cheese melts, about 10 minutes.
Stir carrots and raisins packet and hot water together in a bowl. Stir carrot cake mix, vegetable oil, and eggs together in a bowl until batter is well-combined. Stir carrot-raisin-hot water mixture into batter. Add 1/3 cup chopped pecans to batter; stir in enough flour to reach a pancake-batter consistency. Heat a griddle over medium-high heat and brush with melted butter. Drop batter by 1/3 cupfuls onto griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Transfer pancakes to a wire rack to cool. Place 1 pancake on a plate and top with a layer of cream cheese frosting. Place another pancake on top of the frosting and top with another layer of cream cheese frosting. Top with a final pancake and garnish with 1/4 of the shredded carrot and 1/4 of the toasted pecans. Repeat with remaining pancakes, frosting, carrots, and pecans to create 3 more cakes.
Melt butter in a skillet over medium-high heat; add flour, curry powder, and pepper. Cook and stir butter-flour mixture until smooth, 1 to 2 minutes. Gradually pour milk into butter-flour mixture while continuously stirring until curry sauce is smooth and thickened, about 5 minutes. Mix eggs into sauce and cook until eggs are heated, 2 to 3 minutes. Serve curried eggs over toast.
Heat truffle (or olive) oil in a non-stick 8-inch pan. Beat the eggs in a bowl until fluffy; pour into pan and let cook until the sides set. Push the sides slightly toward the center and let the uncooked egg fill the edges. Repeat until the omelette is set. Add the cheese to one side of the omelette. Fold the omelette in half over the cheese and slide it onto a plate. Shave truffles on top.
Blend milk, banana, apricots, yogurt, wheat germ, oat bran, and maple syrup in a blender until smooth and frothy.
In medium non-stick skillet, heat oil over medium heat; saute red and jalapeno peppers and garlic for 2 minutes or until softened. Add ham and chili powder; saute 2 minutes or until heated through. Remove to bowl; cover to keep warm. In a small bowl or measuring cup, whisk eggs, salt and pepper. Melt butter in the same skillet on medium heat; add eggs and cook, stirring gently, until set but still soft, about 2 minutes. Spoon eggs on each tortilla, top with ham mixture, cheese and onion. Serve with salsa and/or coriander, if desired.
Grease a 9 x 13 (3 L) baking dish. In large non-stick skillet, cook pancetta over medium heat until browned, about 4 minutes. Remove with a slotted spoon and drain. Add onion and red pepper to the drippings in same skillet and cook for about 3 to 5 minutes or until softened. Remove from heat. Meanwhile, in large bowl, beat eggs well with seasonings. Stir in milk. Spread 1/2 of the bread cubes in baking dish. Layer with 1/2 each onion mixture, pancetta and shredded cheese. Top evenly with spoonfuls of ricotta cheese. Top with remaining bread cubes, onion mixture and pancetta. Pour egg mixture evenly over top; press bread cubes down lightly. Sprinkle with remaining shredded cheese. Cover and refrigerate overnight. When ready to serve, preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake uncovered in the preheated oven for 50 to 55 minutes or until center is set and top is golden brown. Let stand 10 minutes before cutting into square to serve.
Stir 1/3 cup water, yogurt, oats, protein powder, ground flax seed, chia seeds, and pumpkin pie spice together in a bowl; add sweet potatoes and 2 tablespoons water and stir until well mixed. Refrigerate 8 hours to overnight.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Spray a pie plate with cooking spray. Blend milk, flour, eggs, and salt together in a blender or food processor until batter is smooth. Melt butter in a 10-inch skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir apple in hot butter until tender, about 5 minutes. Stir lemon juice and sugar into apples until sugar dissolves; pour apple mixture into prepared pie plate. Top with crumbled cheese spread and pour batter over apples and cheese into pie plate. Bake in the preheated oven until golden and set, about 25 minutes.
Combine apples, water, and orange juice in a small pot; bring to a boil and reduce heat to medium-low. Stir 1 teaspoon vanilla extract and cinnamon into apple mixture. Simmer, stirring frequently, until apples are light golden and most of the liquid is absorbed, 20 to 25 minutes. Stir maple syrup into apples and reduce heat to low. Beat flour, oats, milk, egg, coconut oil, 2 teaspoons vanilla extract, sucralose, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl until batter is just-combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-low heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 3 to 4 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Serve finished pancakes with hot apple-maple sauce.
Cut each bread slice into 4 even sticks. Mix coconut, chia seeds, half-and-half, eggs, sugar, cinnamon, vanilla extract, and salt together in a bowl until batter is smooth. Heat a large skillet over medium heat and add butter. Dip bread sticks in the batter until completely coated. Cook coated bread sticks in the hot butter until browned, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Place raspberries in a microwave-safe bowl; heat in microwave until softened, about 1 minutes. Mix yogurt into raspberries. Dip French toast sticks in raspberry-yogurt sauce and top with maple syrup.
Blend yogurt, milk, strawberries, oats, flax, and vanilla extract in a blender until smooth, about 30 seconds.
Blend strawberries, banana, ice, tofu, and agave nectar together in a blender until smooth.
Blend water, blueberries, strawberries, ginger, and agave nectar together in a blender until thick and smooth.
Whisk flour, sugar, cocoa powder, flax seeds, salt, and baking powder together in a bowl. Stir coconut milk, egg, 2 tablespoons vegetable oil, and vanilla extract into flour mixture until batter is smooth. Heat a skillet over medium heat; add 1 teaspoon vegetable oil. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, creating 4-inch circles, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Mix oats, protein powder, oat bran, wheat germ, dried fruit, chia seeds, flax seeds, cinnamon, and salt together in a container or jar; cover with a lid.
Blend water, blueberries, grapes, apple, strawberries, ginger, and agave nectar together in a blender until thick and slushy.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease two 9x5-inch loaf pans with the coconut oil. Beat applesauce, eggs, and butter together in a large bowl until smooth. Add white sugar, raw sugar, vanilla extract, and salt; mix well. Whisk bananas, sour cream, and baking soda together in a separate bowl until smooth; stir into the applesauce mixture until evenly combined. Gradually stir all-purpose flour, 1/4 cup at a time, into banana mixture until well mixed. Gradually stir whole wheat flour, 1/4 cup at a time, into banana-flour mixture until batter is well mixed. Fold almonds, teff, poppy seeds, chia seeds, and flax seeds into the batter. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pans. Bake on the middle rack of the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, 40 to 50 minutes. Cool bread in the pans for 15 minutes before transferring to a wire rack to cool, about 20 minutes.
Combine bananas, eggs, canola oil, and cinnamon in a bread machine; add flour, walnuts, chocolate, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and vanilla extract. Follow manufacturer's instructions for 'quick bread' setting.
Whisk coconut flour, salt, baking powder, and baking soda together in a bowl. Stir pumpkin puree, coconut milk, sugar, and xanthan gum together in another bowl until smooth; stir into flour mixture until batter is thick and smooth. Heat oil in a griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend banana, milk, yogurt, oats, coconut milk, shredded coconut, flax seed, and sugar together in a blender until smooth.
Blend blueberries, milk, yogurt, kiwi, and sugar together in a blender until smooth.
Blend spinach, strawberries, cucumber, carrots, banana, apple, water, ice cubes, and flax seed together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Line 2 baking sheets with silicone baking mats or parchment paper. Combine oats, pumpkin seeds, sunflower seeds, and salt together in a bowl. Add maple syrup and oil; stir until evenly coated. Spread oat mixture onto the prepared baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven for 10 minutes. Remove baking sheets from oven, stir granola, return to oven, and cook until lightly browned, about 7 minutes more. Cool granola on the baking sheets for 20 minutes. Mix cranberries, almonds, and coconut into granola; store in an air-tight container.
Scoop sapodilla pulp out of the fruit and place it in a blender; add ice, chocolate-flavored almond milk, strawberries, and vanilla-flavored almond milk. Blend together until smooth.
Preheat oven 325 degrees F. Wrap tortillas in Reynolds(R) Aluminum Foil and bake for 10 minutes or until soft. Arrange the tortillas to make a crust in a Reynolds(R) Bakeware Pie Pan, overlapping and trimming as needed, and making sure the edges stay below the top edges of the pan. Cook onion and bacon in a large skillet until onion is tender and bacon is crisp. Drain on paper towels. Whisk together eggs, sour cream, and salt in a large bowl. Add onion mixture, corn, and cheese; mix well. Pour egg mixture into tortilla-lined pie pan. Bake 35 to 45 minutes or until a knife inserted near the center comes out clean. If necessary, cover edge of crust with aluminum foil to prevent overbrowning. Let stand 10 minutes before serving.
Mix Alfredo sauce, peas, and ham together in a saucepan over medium heat; cook and stir until sauce is heated through, about 5 minutes. Arrange the biscuit bottoms in a serving dish. Pour sauce over biscuits and top with the biscuit tops.
Preheat oven to 275 degrees F (135 degrees C). Butter a 9x13-inch casserole dish. Place the bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain the bacon slices on paper towels and crumble. Melt 1/4 cup butter in a skillet over medium-low heat; add milk, beef, and flour. Cook and stir beef mixture until smooth, about 3 minutes. Mix mushrooms into creamed beef and cook until thick and bubbling, 5 to 7 minutes. Melt 1/2 cup butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Whisk eggs and evaporated milk together in the melted butter; cook until eggs are almost set, about 5 minutes. Spread about 2/3 of the creamed beef into the prepared casserole dish; top with the scrambled eggs. Add the remaining creamed beef to eggs and sprinkle bacon over the top. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set, 20 to 30 minutes.
Cook sausage and onion in large skillet over medium-high heat 8-10 minutes or until sausage is thoroughly cooked, stirring frequently; drain. Place tostada shells on serving plates.  Top with sausage mixture, eggs, cheese, salsa and cilantro.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F.  Press pie crust onto bottom and up side of 9-inch fluted tart pan with removable bottom; trim edge, reserving trimmings.  Prick bottom of crust with fork.  Bake 10-12 minutes or until golden brown.  Cool.  Reduce heat to 375 degrees F. Cook sausage in large skillet over medium heat 4-5 minutes or until hot stirring frequently.  Remove from skillet; set aside. Melt butter in same skillet.  Add mushrooms; cook 3 minutes or until tender, stirring occasionally.  Place in large bowl.  Add eggs, cheese, 1/2 cup cranberries, cream, parsley and sausage; mix well.   Pour into tart shell. Roll out reserved pie crust trimmings on lightly floured surface.  Use cookie cutters to cut into decorative shapes; arrange over filling. Bake 25-30 minutes or until knife inserted in center comes out clean.  Top with onions and remaining cranberries.  Cut into 8 wedges to serve.
In a dry heavy skillet over medium heat, stir the sesame seeds and dried sardines until they give off their fragrance but don't burn, about 2 minutes. Place the sesame seeds and dried sardines in the work bowl of a small food processor, and pulse until ground to a fine powder. Place the dried sardine mixture in a large bowl, and stir in the miso to make a very thick paste. Add boiling water and mix to a smooth, creamy consistency, and gently stir in the cubed tofu, green onions, and red pepper flakes.
Thoroughly combine the venison, bacon, monosodium glutamate, garlic, onion, mustard, chipotle, salt, anise, fennel, red pepper flakes, and parsley in a large bowl. Grind the mixture through a small plate in a meat grinder. Refrigerate until ready to use.
Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place the eggs, milk, 1/4 teaspoon salt, melted butter, and flour into a blender. Blend until no dry lumps of flour remain in the batter. Scrape down the sides of the blender as needed. Heat an oiled, non-stick skillet over medium heat. Pour in enough batter to cover half of the skillet. Tip and rotate the skillet until the batter covers the entire area. Cook until the batter turns from wet to moist, and the edges begin to curl away from the sides of the skillet. Turn the crepe over, and continue cooking until lightly golden on the other side. Place the crepe onto a plate, and cover with a kitchen towel to keep moist. Repeat with the remaining batter, lightly oiling the skillet as needed to keep the crepes from sticking. Melt 2 tablespoons of butter in a large pot over medium heat. Stir in the garlic and onion, and cook until the onion has softened and turned translucent, about 5 minutes. Pour in the chicken broth, and simmer until reduced to half its original volume. Stir in the chopped zucchini blossoms, cover, and cook a few minutes until the squash blossoms have softened and reduced in volume. Stir in the tomato, nutmeg, and epazote until the tomato begins to soften, about 2 minutes. Add the creme fraiche, then season to taste with salt and pepper. Roll about 2 tablespoons of zucchini filling in each crepe, and place into a 9x13-inch baking dish. Pour the half-and-half cream evenly over top of the crepes, and sprinkle with grated Manchego cheese. Cover the dish with aluminum foil, tenting if necessary so the foil does not touch the cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until the crepes are hot and the cheese has melted, about 10 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat 3 tablespoons of olive oil over medium heat in an oven-safe skillet, and cook and stir the onion and garlic until translucent, about 5 minutes. Stir in the green peppers, and cook and stir until they have begun to soften, 5 more minutes. Pour the eggs over the vegetables, and stir in the basil, rosemary, salt, and pepper. Reduce the heat to medium-low, let the eggs sit over the heat until they have started to set, about 10 minutes. Transfer the skillet to the preheated oven and cook the frittata until fully set, about 15 minutes. While the frittata is baking, heat 1 cup of olive oil in a deep-fryer or large saucepan to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Deep-fry the sweet potato slices, a layer at a time, until golden brown and crisp, about 5 minutes. Remove with a slotted spoon, and drain on paper towels. Top baked frittata with the fried sweet potato slices to serve.
In a microwave safe bowl, combine apples, cinnamon and water. Microwave for 3-4 minutes. The apples should be slightly tender. Drain apples and toss with Marzetti Old Fashioned Caramel Dip. Spoon the apples into bottom of greased 9x13 baking dish. In a mixing bowl, whisk together eggs, milk and vanilla. Dip each piece of bread into egg mixture and place on top of apple layer. Repeat with remaining bread slices. Spoon any extra egg mixture over bread. Cover with plastic wrap and Refrigerate for 3 hours or overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Pour melted butter over the slices of bread and sprinkle with pecans. Bake 25-30 minutes or until bread is golden brown. Allow French toast to stand for a few minutes before eating. Serve with extra warm caramel sauce.
Sift flour, 1 tablespoon sugar, baking powder, and salt together in a large bowl. Whisk milk, butter, eggs, and vanilla extract into flour mixture until smooth. Heat vegetable oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Scoop about 1/4 cup batter and pour onto hot skillet. Tilt the pan in a circular motion to evenly distribute the batter. Cook crepe until bottom is lightly browned, about 2 minutes. Loosen with a spatula, flip, and cook the other side, about 2 more minutes. Transfer to a plate. Add more oil to the pan and repeat with remaining batter. Mix coconut, 1 tablespoon white sugar, and cardamom together in a small bowl. Spread 1 to 2 tablespoons of coconut mixture into the center of each crepe; fold crepe over the filling like an envelope or in half.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Beat cake mix and water together in a bowl until moist; pour into a 10-inch tube pan. Bake in the preheated oven until top is golden brown, cracked, and looks dry, 38 to 48 minutes. Set aside 8 hours to overnight. Whisk eggs, milk, brown sugar, cinnamon, vanilla, and salt together in a bowl. Cut cake into 12 slices. Dip each slice in the egg mixture to coat. Melt enough of the butter in a large skillet over medium heat to coat the cooking surface. Cook the cake slices in batches the skillet until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes per side.
Place tomatillos in a saucepan with water to cover; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to low; simmer until color begins to lighten and fruit is soft to the touch, 10 to 15 minutes. Transfer tomatillos to a food processor or blender. Add jalapenos, 1/3 cup cilantro, garlic, salt, and pepper; blend until smooth. Cover with plastic wrap. Refrigerate at least 2 hours for best flavor. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir chicken and onion until onions begin to brown, about 10 minutes. Add olives; cook for 5 minutes. Add cilantro; cook and stir until wilted, about 1 minute more. Remove from heat. Line the bottom of a 8-inch square casserole dish with 2 to 3 layers of tortilla chips, breaking chips slightly. Add half of the sauce; toss with chips. Top with chicken mixture and the remaining sauce. Sprinkle cotija cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until tortilla chips are softened, 15 to 25 minutes.
Heat a non-stick crepe pan over medium-high heat. Whisk flour and water together in a bowl. Add egg and mix well. Whisk butter, salt, and caraway seeds into flour mixture to form a smooth batter. Pour about 1/4 cup batter into heated pan. Tilt the pan around so the batter forms a nice round shape. Cook until bubbles form throughout the batter, 2 to 4 minutes. Flip the crepe by using spatula to loosen it from the pan. Flick your wrist upwards to give the crepe a toss, flipping it, and landing it back in the pan. Cook the second side until lightly browned, about 30 seconds. Repeat with remaining batter.
Heat a greased griddle until drops of water sprinkled on it evaporate noisily. Stir baking mix, water, Cheddar cheese, and pesto together in a bowl to form a batter; adjust amount of baking mix and water according to your preference. Pour 1/4 cup batter onto the griddle. Cook until bubbles begin to form on top, 2 to 3 minutes; turn and cook second side to a golden brown color, another 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat until all batter is used.
Beat milk, egg, applesauce, ground ginger, vanilla extract, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Whisk baking mix into the milk mixture until just combined into a loose batter. Prepare a skillet with cooking spray and place over medium heat. Ladle about 1/4 cup batter into the prepared skillet; cook until bubbles begin to form on the top, 3 to 5 minutes. Turn the pancake and continue cooking until the other side of the pancake is golden brown, 3 to 5 minutes more. Transfer pancake to a plate and cover with a lid to keep warm. Repeat until batter is completely used.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat 1 tablespoon olive oil over medium-high heat in large heavy skillet. Add red onion; cook and stir 3 minutes. Add garlic; cook and stir 2 minutes. Add kale and continue to stir until kale is wilted, about 5 minutes. Place kale mixture in a large bowl. Gently toss kale with tamari sauce, Romano cheese, whole wheat bread crumbs, eggs, oregano, sea salt, and black pepper until well combined. Lightly coat an 8x8-inch baking pan with 2 teaspoons olive oil; pour in egg and kale mixture. Distribute chopped pickled picante peppers on top. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are well set and the top is lightly browned,  20 to 25 minutes. Cut into squares to serve.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Squeeze and drain any excess moisture from hash brown potatoes. Stir potatoes and butter in a bowl; press mixture into the bottom and up the sides of a 10-inch pie dish to make a crust. Bake crust in preheated oven until lightly browned, 25 minutes. Beat heavy cream and eggs in a bowl. Remove potato crust from pie dish and break apart; stir potatoes into egg mixture in a bowl. Layer ham and Monterey Jack cheese blend into bottom of the empty pie dish; pour egg-potato mixture over ham and cheese. Bake quiche in preheated oven until eggs are set, about 30 minutes.
Blend spinach, carrots, beet, pear, milk, banana, cottage cheese, walnuts, almonds, yogurt, honey, and cinnamon together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Make the salsa: Place the poblano peppers and the tomatoes over a medium gas flame, either on a grill or right on the burners. Rotate the vegetables every few minutes so that the skins don't completely blacken. Remove the vegetables once their skins are blistering and just partially charred. Let the vegetables cool a bit. Remove the skins of the vegetables with a paring knife. Cut the poblanos into 1/2 inch wide strips, and set them aside. Cut the tomatoes into 1/2 inch cubes, and put them into a bowl. Add onions, lime juice, cilantro, jalapeno, salt and pepper to the bowl. Mix well. Chill the salsa if you won't be making the frittata within the next few hours. Make the chips: Stack the tortillas and cut the stack into six wedges. Spread the pieces on a baking sheet, lightly salt them and bake them for 10 minutes or until they are crisp. Remove the chips from the oven but keep the oven on. Make the frittata: Heat the olive oil in a 10 to 12 inch non-stick oven-proof skillet over medium heat. Add the eggs, and stir them for the first minute of cooking with a plastic spatula. Let the eggs rest for a few seconds, then push the frittata to one side of the pan so the uncooked egg runs underneath. When the frittata is still moist but no longer runny, sprinkle it with salt, pepper and the shredded Jack cheese. Place the poblano strips in a star shape on top of the cheese. Bake the frittata in the oven for 3 to 4 minutes or until it is just set. Remove the skillet from the oven and stick the tortilla chips around the edge of the frittata. Take the skillet to the table and cut the frittata into wedges. Serve with the salsa.
Place oven rack on highest level. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Set prebaked tart shell on a baking sheet (see Editor's Note). Chop the clams finely, and reserve 1/2 cup of the liquid. Beat the eggs well, and add clam liquid, cream, nutmeg, salt, and pepper. Whisk until smooth, and stir in the clams. Fry the bacon over moderate heat until crisp, and then remove from pan and set aside. Leave about half a tablespoon of bacon grease in the pan, and add onion. Cook and stir until the onion has softened and turned translucent, about 5 minutes. clam mixture. Crumble the bacon into mixture, then pour into mixture into pastry shell. Crumble the bacon into the tart shell; add onion. Carefully pour custard into shell and transfer to preheated oven. Bake on the top rack until center is set, or until a knife inserted in center comes out clean, about 25 minutes. Serve hot or warm.
Place ingredients in bread machine pan in the order suggested by the manufacturer. Select white bread setting. Start. To bake bread in oven: select dough or manual cycle. Once cycle is complete, shape dough and place in a greased loaf pan. Allow to rise in a warm spot until doubled in size. Bake in a preheated 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) oven for 35 to 45 minutes or until a thermometer inserted in the center of the loaf reads 200 degrees F (95 degrees C).
Place the turkey bacon in a large, nonstick skillet over medium-high heat. Cook for about 30 seconds until the grease starts to render from the turkey. Stir in the garlic and onion, and cook for a few minutes until the aroma of the garlic mellows and the turkey has fully cooked. Stir in the green, red, yellow, and orange bell peppers, then add the basil, parsley, Worcestershire sauce, and cayenne pepper. Cook and stir until the peppers begin to soften, about 3 minutes. Pour in the Scotch, and simmer until evaporated. Scrape the pepper mixture into a bowl, and keep warm. Return the skillet to the stove over medium-low heat. Whisk together the eggs and five-spice powder until smooth. Pour into the skillet, and stir briefly until the egg begins to coagulate. Sprinkle with the Monterey Jack cheese and Gouda cheese. Continue cooking until the cheese begins to melt, then place the pepper mixture onto the omelet in a strip running down the center. Fold the sides of the omelet over the filling, and slide onto a plate. Cut the omelet in half, and dot each serving with salsa and sour cream. Sprinkle with chives to serve.
Heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add onion, green pepper, red pepper flakes and dried thyme; cook and stir until the onion is beginning to brown, about 7 minutes. Reduce the heat to low and stir in the tomato paste and season with salt and pepper. Simmer for 3 minutes then stir in the water. Mix in the corned beef and then let it simmer until most of the liquid has evaporated.
In a medium bowl, stir together the flour, sugar and salt. Stir in the egg yolks, buttermilk and sage all at once. Let the batter stand at room temperature for 30 minutes. In a clean bowl, beat egg whites with an electric mixer until they can hold a stiff peak. Fold egg whites into the sage batter. Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Drop spoonfuls of batter into the skillet to make small pancakes. Flip when bubbles appear on the surface and cook until light brown on both sides. Repeat with remaining batter. Add more oil to the skillet if needed. Sprinkle Romano cheese over the pancakes while still warm.
Pour the wine into a pitcher or wine carafe. Add strawberries and woodruff leaves; let stand for at least 1 hour. Strain out the berries and leaves, then stir in lemon juice. Serve chilled and garnish with strawberry halves.
Place eggs in a medium saucepan and cover with cold water. Bring water to a boil and immediately remove from heat. Cover and let eggs stand in hot water for 10 to 12 minutes. Remove from hot water, cool and peel. Cut in half lengthwise. Remove and reserve yolks. Place bacon in a large, deep skillet. Cook over medium high heat until evenly brown; drain and crumble. In a medium bowl, mash egg yolks and mix with bacon, chutney, mayonnaise and almonds. Fill the egg whites with the mixture.
Blend almond milk and kefir together in a blender; add kale, spinach, and Swiss chard. Blend until smooth and the mixture reaches the 4 cup mark. Add persimmons, bananas, avocado, chia seeds, and honey; puree until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour a 9x13-inch loaf pan. Bring raisins and water to a boil in a small saucepan, reduce heat to medium, and boil 5 minutes; set aside to cool. Mix rolled oats, bran cereal, whole wheat flour, sugar, and salt in a bowl. Mix milk with lemon juice in a small bowl and let stand 1 or 2 minutes to sour. Stir baking soda into sour milk until dissolved. Pour milk mixture into dry ingredients; beat egg into the mixture. Stir raisins and their liquid into the batter. Pour batter into prepared pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the middle comes out clean, about 1 hour. Cool in pan for 15 minutes before removing to finish cooling on a wire rack.
Heat broiler. Spoon 2 Tbsp. Cooking Creme into small microwaveable bowl; set aside. Whisk remaining Cooking Creme, eggs and black pepper in separate bowl until well blended. Melt margarine in 10-inch ovenproof skillet on medium heat. Add green peppers; cook and stir 5 min. Stir in onions, ham and egg mixture; cover. Cook on medium-low heat 9 to 10 min. or until centre is almost set. Top frittata with cheese. Broil, 6 inches from heat, 2 min. or until centre is set and cheese is melted. Microwave reserved Cooking Creme on HIGH 10 to 12 sec. or until warmed. Drizzle over frittata.
Bring 2 cups shrimp stock to a boil in a saucepan; reduce heat to low and let the stock simmer. Whisk cornmeal with remaining 1 cup shrimp stock in a bowl until smooth. Whisk the moistened cornmeal into the simmering shrimp stock. Stir grits occasionally until slightly thickened, 3 to 5 minutes. Stir in butter until incorporated. Mix in sharp Cheddar cheese, about 1 tablespoon at a time, until cheese has smoothly melted into grits. Bring grits back to a simmer and cook, stirring often, until tender, 15 to 20 more minutes. Season with salt and black pepper. While grits are simmering, heat canola oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir celery until tender, 3 to 4 minutes; stir in onion, green bell pepper, thyme, and oregano. Cook and stir vegetables until onion is translucent, 7 to 8 minutes. Mix tomato sauce into cooked vegetables and simmer for about 5 minutes to blend the flavors; stir in the sour cream to make a sauce. Stir shrimp into the sauce with vegetables and cover skillet. Bring sauce to a simmer, cover, and reduce heat to low. Simmer until shrimp are pink and no longer translucent in the middle, 5 to 7 minutes. To serve, turn grits into a large shallow serving bowl and arrange shrimp over the grits using tongs. Pour sauce and vegetables over shrimp and grits; season to taste with hot pepper sauce and sprinkle with green onion.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place egg white of 1 egg into a small bowl and whisk with water until foamy. Set the egg yolk aside in a large bowl. Fit pie crust into a 9-inch pie dish. Brush egg white mixture over the edges and inside of crust. Poke holes into the inside and up the sides of the crust with a fork. Bake crust in the preheated oven until the egg white glaze cooks onto the crust, about 5 minutes. Pour any remaining egg white mixture into the large bowl with the yolk; whisk in 2 more eggs and milk until thoroughly combined. Set egg mixture aside. Heat canola oil in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir mushrooms and onion until the mushroom's liquid has evaporated, 9 to 15 minutes. Season with salt and black pepper. Turn off heat and stir spinach into hot mushrooms to wilt. Mix in tarragon, paprika, and cayenne pepper. Gently stir mushroom-spinach mixture into eggs and milk. Fold 1 1/4 cup of white Cheddar cheese into the filling. Pour mushroom-spinach filling into the prebaked pie crust and arrange slices of zucchini in a decorative pattern on top of the filling. Top with 1/4 cup white Cheddar cheese in an even layer. Place the quiche onto a baking sheet and bake in the oven until top is lightly browned and a knife inserted into the middle of the quiche comes out clean, 35 to 40 minutes. Allow quiche to cool on the hot baking sheet for 5 minutes before removing to finish cooling on a wire rack until serving temperature, 10 to 15 more minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Grease waffle iron evenly. Place coconut into a blender and pulse several times; blend until coconut becomes a fine powder. Combine coconut, almond flour, whey protein powder, baking powder, baking soda, salt, and cinnamon in a medium bowl. Mix together 1/2 cup mashed banana, milk, vanilla extract, and maple syrup in a small bowl. Separate the whites from the yolks of the 2 eggs; transfer all 3 egg whites to a metal bowl. Mix 2 egg yolks into the banana mixture. Beat egg whites until foamy using an electric mixer, beating until stiff peaks form. Lift your beater or whisk straight up: the egg whites will form sharp peaks. Pour banana mixture into almond flour mixture and stir until combined. Mix in 1/3 of the egg white mixture until combined; gently fold in remaining 2/3 egg white mixture, preserving as much volume as possible. Ladle batter into preheated waffle iron in the amount recommended by manufacturer. Close lid and cook waffle until golden and crisp, 3 to 4 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Top waffles with remaining 1 mashed banana.
Combine the cider, apple chunks, and cinnamon sticks in a large kettle and bring to a boil over medium heat. Turn the heat down to low and add the mace, anise seed, ground cinnamon, nutmeg, ginger and brown sugar.  Stir to combine, and simmer for 20 minutes until the spices have developed their flavor. Drop in the orange and lemon slices, simmer for 5 more minutes, and turn off the heat.  Ladle the wassail punch into mugs and serve hot. Include a few pieces of cooked apple or a cooked orange or lemon slice in each mug.
Dissolve 1/2 teaspoon of sugar in the warm water in a 1-cup measuring cup, and sprinkle with the yeast. Stir to mix the yeast into the water, and let stand in a warm place until frothy and doubled in volume, 10 to 15 minutes. Stir together 1/3 cup of sugar, 2 raw eggs, salt, the yeast mixture, milk, and 3 cups of flour in a large bowl, and beat with an electric mixer for 3 minutes to develop gluten. Mix the remaining flour into the batter, and beat until the dough is shiny, soft, and elastic, about 5 minutes. Scrape down the bowl, cover with plastic wrap, and refrigerate for 30 minutes. Place sticks of butter 1 inch apart between 2 large pieces of waxed paper. Roll the butter out into a square about 12 inches on a side, place the waxed paper with square of butter onto a baking sheet, and freeze for 15 minutes. Turn the dough out onto a well-floured work surface, turn the dough around to pick up flour on all sides, and sprinkle the dough with flour. Roll the dough out into a rectangle 18 inches square. Brush off excess flour from the dough, if necessary. Peel off the top layer of waxed paper from the butter square. Place the square of cold butter, remaining waxed-paper side up, catty-corner onto the dough rectangle so the corners of the dough extend out beyond the butter. Peel off the remaining waxed paper. Fold the top and bottom points over the butter, meeting in the middle; fold the left and right points over the butter. Pinch the sides and seams of the dough together to enclose the butter in the dough. Roll the flat dough envelope filled with butter, seam side down, out on the floured surface to a rectangle 12 by 24 inches, and fold the dough in half (into a 12x12 inch square), then in half again, to make a 6x12 inch square of dough with four butter layers. Chill the dough for about 5 minutes; then roll the dough out again to a 12 by 24-inch rectangle, and fold in quarters as before; chill, repeat rolling and folding the dough one more time. Refrigerate dough at least 1 more hour or overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line 2 baking sheets with parchment paper. Cut the dough into two pieces (you will see buttery layers). On a well-floured surface, roll out a dough piece into a rectangle 30 by 9 inches; cut the rectangle into 3 long strips, 30 by 3 inches each. Mix almond filling, 1/2 cup of butter, and 1/2 cup of sugar together in a bowl, and spread half the filling mixture all down the center of the 3 strips. Fold the strips over the filling the long way and pinch the edges closed, enclosing the filling in 3 long ropes. Braid the 3 ropes together, and arrange the braid into a ring. Pinch the ends closed. Repeat for 2nd dough piece and remaining half of filling, making two ring-shaped braided pastries. Place the pastries onto the lined baking sheets, reforming into symmetrical rings if necessary. Set 3 hard-cooked Easter eggs, wedged between braids, into top of each braided pastry. Brush pastries, eggs and all, with beaten egg; sprinkle with additional white sugar and sliced almonds. Bake in the preheated oven until browned and crisp, 40 to 45 minutes.
Sprinkle the yeast and sugar over 1/2 cup of warm water in a large bowl. The water should be no more than 100 degrees F (40 degrees C). Let stand for 5 minutes until the yeast softens and begins to form a creamy foam. Beat in 1 egg and butter. Gently stir in the flour, salt, and lemon zest until the dough has pulled together. Gather the dough into a ball, then place in a lightly oiled bowl. Turn dough ball to coat with oil. Cover with a light cloth and let rise in a warm place (80 to 95 degrees F (27 to 35 degrees C)) until doubled in volume, about 45 minutes. Punch down the dough, and place in a 10-inch tart pan with a removable bottom. Spread dough out from the center using fingers. The dough should be thinner in the center and thicker at the edges. Chill in the refrigerator for 20 minutes. Preheat an oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat the vegetable oil in a skillet over medium heat. Stir in the onion; cook and stir until the onion has softened and turned translucent, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle chilled tart shell with Gouda and Parmesan cheeses. Arrange the cooked onion and piquillo peppers decoratively over the cheese. Beat 2 eggs and heavy cream with the mustard in a bowl; pour egg mixture over the onion and cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until the crust is golden brown and the custard has set, 30 to 45 minutes.
Blend spinach, soy milk, banana, peanut butter, and cinnamon together in a blender until smooth.
Blend raspberries, yogurt, ice, apricot, honey, flax seeds, and lemon juice together in a blender until smooth.
Blend mango, banana, water, lettuce, ice, and flax seeds together in a blender until smooth, about 2 minutes. Add chia seeds to mango mixture and stir. Let sit until smoothie thickens slightly, about 2 minutes.
Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil. Cut the Anaheim pepper into halves lengthwise; remove and discard the stem, seeds, and ribs. Place the pepper, cut-sides down, onto the prepared baking sheet. Cook under the preheated broiler until the skin of the pepper has blackened and blistered, 5 to 8 minutes. Place the blackened pepper into a bowl and tightly seal with plastic wrap. Allow the pepper to steam as it cools, about 20 minutes. Remove and discard skins; chop pepper. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish. Cook and stir sausage in a large skillet over medium-high heat until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; remove sausage using a slotted spoon to a plate, leaving rendered fat in the skillet. Return skillet to medium-high heat. Saute onion, zucchini, bell pepper, and Anaheim pepper in hot skillet until just tender, about 4 minutes. Stir eggs, hash browns, Cheddar cheese, cottage cheese, and Swiss cheese together in a large bowl; add sausage and sauteed vegetables and stir. Pour egg mixture into prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set and mixture is bubbling, about 70 minutes. Let cool for 10 minutes before slicing.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Press pie crust into a 9-inch pie dish. Melt butter in a saucepan over medium heat. Cook and stir cornstarch, nutmeg, garlic salt, and black pepper into melted butter until cornstarch dissolves, 2 to 3 minutes. Pour milk into cornstarch mixture; cook and stir until thickened and bubbling, about 5 minutes. Stir Swiss cheese into milk mixture; cook and stir until melted and cheese sauce is smooth, about 5 minutes. Whisk 1 to 2 tablespoons cheese sauce and eggs together in a bowl until eggs are warmed; pour into cheese sauce and whisk until incorporated, 1 to 2 minutes. Stir ham into cheese sauce; pour into pie shell. Bake in the preheated oven until pie is set in the middle, 30 to 35 minutes. Let cool slightly before serving, 5 to 10 minutes.
Stir matzo meal, milk, ground almonds, chocolate chips, eggs, vanilla sugar, cinnamon, and salt together in a bowl. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until the edges start to dry and are browned dry, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 2 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place farmer's cheese in 1 bowl and mozzarella cheese in a separate bowl. Combine sausage, salami, and pepperoni in a non-stick frying pan over medium heat; cook and stir until warmed, about 5 minutes. Stir ricotta cheese into meat mixture until melted and stringy, about 5 minutes. Stir farmer's cheese and mozzarella cheese into meat mixture until warmed, about 5 minutes. Blend eggs together in a blender until frothy; pour into meat-cheese mixture and stir until some of the liquid evaporates, about 5 minutes. Pour egg mixture into a 9-inch pie pan. Bake in the preheated oven until top has risen and is starting to brown, about 20 minutes. Cool frittata on a wire rack until set, at least 5 minutes.
Whisk coconut flour, rice flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl. Mix buttermilk, egg yolks, butter, and almond extract together in a separate bowl. Heat griddle to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) or a skillet over medium-high heat; lightly grease with macadamia nut oil. Beat egg whites in a glass or metal bowl until medium peaks form. Lift your beater or whisk straight up: the tip of the peak formed by the egg whites should curl over slightly. Stir buttermilk mixture into flour mixture; fold in egg whites, 1/3 at a time, until batter is just mixed and thick. Ladle batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend spinach, ice, grapefruit, mango, raspberries, milk, parsley, and pumpkin seeds together in a blender until smooth.
Heat a large skillet over medium heat; prepare with cooking spray. Stir pumpkin, soy milk, corn, eggs, and onion together in a bowl; add rice flour, baking, powder, and cinnamon and stir until well blended. Drop mixture by desired portions onto preheated pan. Cook until lightly golden on the bottom, about 3 minutes. Flip cakes and continue cooking until the bottom is lightly golden, about 3 minutes more. Repeat cooking in batches until batter is completely used.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Put butter and apples in 11x13 glass baking dish. Bake until butter and apples begin to melt and brown (about 5 minutes). Remove from oven and set aside. Place eggs in a blender and pulse until smooth; add coconut milk, applesauce, arrowroot powder, almond flour, vanilla, 2 tablespoons maple syrup, and sea salt. Blend until smooth, 45 to 60 seconds. Carefully pour batter over browned butter-apple mixture in the casserole dish. Bake until pancake is set in the middle and edges are lightly browned, about 20 minutes. Dust with cinnamon before serving, if desired.
Combine milk and oats together in a bowl; allow oats to soften, about 5 minutes. Stir pancake mix, banana, chocolate chips, walnuts, egg white, flax seeds, and olive oil into milk-oats mixture until batter is just mixed. Preheat and grease a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Scoop about 1/4 cup batter into preheated waffle iron and cook according to manufacturer's instructions until golden brown, 2 to 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion until golden brown, 10 to 15 minutes. Add vegetables, lemon juice, and 1 pinch salt to onion; stir well. Remove skillet from heat. Mix eggs, feta cheese, milk, mozzarella cheese, salt, and pepper together in a separate bowl. Mix cold water and corn oil together in a bowl. Place flour and 1 pinch salt in a separate bowl. Slowly pour oil mixture into flour mixture, mixing until a thick dough forms. Press the dough into two 9-inch round baking pans. Spoon the vegetable mixture into the crusts and top with egg mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until quiches are set in the middle, about 20 minutes.
Heat a skillet over medium-low heat. Cook and stir pumpkin seeds in the hot skillet until toasted, about 5 minutes. Mix toasted pumpkin seeds, whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl using a whisk. Beat milk, pumpkin puree, 1/2 cup vegetable oil, egg, and sugar together in a separate bowl using a whisk until smooth; mix into flour mixture until batter is smooth. Heat 1 teaspoon vegetable oil in a non-stick pan over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls into the pan and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 2 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Stir together flour, sugar, baking powder, cinnamon and salt in a large bowl. Make a well in the dry ingredients and add vanilla, eggs, oil, fruits, nuts and coconut; mix well. Pour into 2 greased 8-1/2 x 4-1/2-inch loaf pans. Bake for 45 to 50 minutes or until a wooden pick inserted near the center of loaf comes out clean. Cool in pans 5 minutes. Remove from pans and cool completely on wire racks. When loaves are cool, mix together ingredients for glaze and pour over loaves.
Blend coconut water, banana, ice, hemp protein powder, and cocoa powder together in a blender until smooth.
Blend water, spinach, parsley, avocado, lemon juice, and safflower oil together in a blender until smooth.
Blend coconut water, kale, walnuts, and coconut in a blender until smooth; refrigerate up to 1 hour.
Mix coconut flour, salt, baking powder, and baking soda together in a bowl. Beat coconut milk, banana, and xanthan gum together in a separate bowl until smooth; add to flour mixture and stir until there are no clumps. Brush half the bacon drippings onto the cooking surface of a large skillet placed over medium heat to preheat. Spread about half the batter onto the skillet using a silicone spatula to spread to about 1/4-inch thick. Cook until it bottom looks dry and dark brown, 5 to 7 minutes. Flip the pancake and cook until the other side is browned, about 5 minutes more. Repeat with remaining bacon drippings and batter.
Heat safflower oil and olive oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook stir potatoes until cooked through and lightly browned, 5 to 10 minutes. Add eggs, vegetable blend, creamer, Parmesan cheese, butter, onion powder, garlic powder, celery salt, parsley, sea salt, and black pepper to potatoes. Cover skillet and cook, stirring frequently, until eggs are set and scrambled and vegetables are tender, 10 to 15 minutes.
Heat broiler. Melt butter in a 10-inch nonstick skillet over medium heat. Add bell pepper and onion; cook, stirring frequently for 5 minutes. Add salami; continue cooking 2 minutes. Beat eggs lightly. Stir in half and half and 1/2 cup of the cheese, salt and pepper. Stir into vegetables in skillet. Cover and cook 8 minutes or until eggs are set on bottom. If skillet is not ovenproof wrap handle in foil. Sprinkle remaining 1/2 cup cheese over frittata. Transfer skillet to broiler; broil 4 to 5 inches from heat source 2 minutes or until eggs are set in center and cheese is melted. Garnish with parsley. Cut into wedges to serve.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Mix oats, coconut, wheat germ, peanuts, sunflower seeds, sesame seeds, cinnamon, and ginger together in a bowl. Whisk honey, oil, and water together in a separate bowl. Drizzle honey mixture over oat mixture; toss to coat. Spread mixture in a thin layer on baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven for 10 minutes. Stir and bake another 5 minutes. Stir again and bake until granola is slightly browned, 3 to 5 more minutes. Cool granola and stir in raisins. Store in airtight containers.
Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Mash banana into the hot oil; cook until slightly browned, 5 to 7 minutes. Stir cereal into the banana mixture; continue cooking until the cereal softens slightly, about 5 minutes more.
Mix gingerbread mix, water and egg in large bowl until batter is smooth. Heat griddle or large skillet sprayed with cooking spray on medium heat. Pour batter onto griddle, using scant 1/4 cup batter for each pancake. Cook until bubbles form on tops, then turn to brown other sides. Meanwhile, beat pudding mix and milk in microwaveable bowl with whisk 2 min. Microwave on HIGH 1-1/2 min. or until heated through, stirring after 1 min. Serve pancakes with warm lemon sauce.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Whisk eggs and milk together in a large bowl. Heat olive oil in a large oven-proof skillet over medium-high heat. Pour 1/2 the egg mixture into the hot oil; arrange salami over egg mixture and sprinkle with parsley. Add 2/3 the Parmesan cheese, 2/3 Romano cheese, and 2/3 the mozzarella cheese over the salami-parsley layer; season with salt, pepper, and red pepper flakes. Cook egg-cheese mixture until edges of frittata are browned and middle is set, 10 to 15 minutes. Pour the remaining egg mixture over frittata; sprinkle with remaining Parmesan cheese, Romano cheese, and mozzarella cheese; season with salt, pepper, and red pepper flakes. Bake in the preheated oven until frittata has risen to about 3 inches and middle is set, 20 to 25 minutes. Carefully turn frittata onto a cutting board; cut into 2-inch squares using a sharp knife. Arrange squares in a bowl and refrigerate until chilled, about 1 hour.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Coat a 12 cup muffin pan with cooking spray. In a large bowl, prepare muffin batter as directed. Fold in the ham, cheese, and chives or scallions. Spoon the batter into the prepared cups, filling each three-quarter full. Bake the muffins until their tops are lightly browned, about 20 minutes. Let them cool in the pan on a wire rack for 3 minutes, then turn them out onto the rack and let them cool completely. The muffins can be frozen in a plastic freezer bag for up to three months.
Place buckwheat groats in a bowl. Pour boiling water over groats and set aside for groats to absorb water, about 10 minutes. Retain water if it doesn't all absorb. Heat a skillet over medium heat. Whisk flour, coconut, and baking powder together in a separate bowl. Beat milk, egg, oil, and honey together in a third bowl. Stir buckwheat groats mixture and flour mixture into milk mixture until just combined. Spray skillet with cooking spray. Pour batter, 1/4 to 1/3 cup per pancake, into heated skillet. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 more minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend soy milk, banana, ice cubes, cherry juice, agave nectar, flax seed meal, and vanilla extract together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease 2 loaf pans. Mix pumpkin pie filling, sweet potato pie filling, water, and oil together in a bowl; add flour, baking soda, and baking powder. Stir well. Pour mixture into the prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into each loaf comes out clean, about 1 hour.
Blend water, macadamia nuts, apricots, and vanilla powder in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Coat a 3-quart rectangular baking dish with cooking spray; set aside. Cook bison sausage and onion over medium heat in an extra-large skillet until bison sausage is brown. Add apple and cook for 5 more minutes. Drain off fat. Whisk eggs, milk, sage, and pepper in a large bowl. Place bread cubes in prepared baking dish. Top with bison sausage mixture and the cheese. Gently mix to evenly distribute ingredients. Pour egg mixture over bread mixture. Bake, uncovered, for 40 to 45 minutes or until a knife inserted near the center comes out clean. Let stand for 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Mix flour, baking powder, baking soda, cinnamon, and salt together in a bowl. Place raspberries in a separate bowl. Spoon 2 tablespoons flour mixture over raspberries and toss until coated. Combine pears, brown sugar, oil, eggs, and vanilla extract in a separate bowl. Stir flour mixture into pear mixture until batter is just combined. Gently fold raspberries and pecans into batter. Pour batter into prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of the bread comes out clean, about 1 1/2 hours. Cool in pan for 20 minutes before removing loaf to cool completely on a wire rack.
Place the rutabaga in a small saucepan with enough water to cover, bring to a boil, and cook until rutabaga is tender when pierced with a fork, about 15 minutes; drain and mash rutabaga. Bring a pot of water to a boil over high heat; stir frozen vegetables into boiling water. Cook until tender, about 4 minutes; drain and allow to cool slightly. Chop vegetables finely. Stir together the mashed rutabaga, chopped cooked vegetables, and mashed potatoes in a large bowl; set aside. Fry bacon in a large skillet over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Reserve bacon fat in the skillet. Cook and stir cabbage, red pepper, green pepper, and onion in the same skillet with the bacon fat until tender and caramelized, about 10 minutes. Stir cabbage mixture into rutabaga mixture; stir in egg and black pepper. In the same skillet over medium high heat, ladle spoonfuls of the cabbage mixture; fry until golden brown, about 5 minutes. Serve with the cooked bacon.
Puree all ingredients in a blender until smooth.
Toast bread in a toaster until medium brown, about 2 minutes. Spread each slice equally with barbeque sauce. Melt butter in a small skillet over medium-high heat. Crack eggs in and fry on both sides, about 4 minutes. Place each fried egg on a piece of toast. Top each with 1/4 of an avocado. Sprinkle an equal amount of cheese on top of each toast.
Combine yogurt and spirulina powder in a bowl; mix well. Top with cornflakes, strawberries, kiwifruit, blueberries, and pecans.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 6x10-inch baking pan thoroughly with oil. Mix zucchini, eggs, onion, flour, carrot, bacon, Cheddar cheese, salt, and pepper together in a large bowl. Pour into the prepared baking pan. Bake in the preheated oven until fully set, 30 to 40 minutes. Cool before slicing.
Place banana in a bowl and mash with a fork until pureed. Add oats, protein powder, cocoa powder, soy milk, water, flax seeds, and berries; stir well and transfer to a mason jar. Cover and refrigerate overnight.
Melt butter in a non-stick skillet over high heat. Cook and stir garlic until quite crispy and golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes. Reduce heat to medium. Add zucchini and chanterelle mushrooms. Cook and stir until golden brown, about 5 minutes. Increase heat to medium-high and spread zucchini and mushrooms over the bottom of the skillet. Pour in eggs. Pick up skillet and tilt to spread egg evenly. Working quickly, sprinkle in cheese and season with salt and pepper. Reduce heat to medium. Watch for the top of the omelet to begin bubbling and give the pan a wiggle to loosen the base. When cheese has melted on top and egg has the desired consistency, fold omelet over and serve.
Mix flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl. Add coconut milk, eggs, and oil; stir to combine. Stir in pineapple and banana until just combined; do not overmix. Melt brown sugar and butter together in a saucepan over medium heat. Add pineapple tidbits and 1 tablespoon reserved pineapple juice. Bring to a boil. Reduce heat and simmer until slightly thickened, 3 to 5 minutes. Preheat a griddle to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Pour 1/4-cup scoops of batter onto the hot griddle. Cook until bubbles form, about 3 minutes. Flip and cook until set, about 5 minutes more. Serve pancakes with the pineapple topping.
Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Melt butter in a medium iron skillet over medium heat; stir in onion. Cook and stir until the onion has softened and turned translucent, about 5 minutes. Add zucchini and cook until tender, about 3 minutes. Season with salt and black pepper. Whisk eggs, cream, and nutmeg in a bowl. Pour over zucchini mixture and sprinkle with Gouda cheese. Place iron skillet in the preheated oven and bake until golden and set, 15 to 20 minutes.
Dissolve yeast in warm water in a bowl. Let stand until yeast softens and begins to form a creamy foam, about 10 minutes. Add egg, egg white, oil, and vinegar; whisk until well combined. Grease a 2-pound loaf pan. Sift flour and xanthan gum into the bowl of a stand mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; mix on low speed. Gradually mix in yeast mixture. Increase speed to medium and mix until batter is smooth. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan and smooth out. Cover with a towel and let rise in a warm place until doubled in volume, about 1 hour. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until the top is golden brown, about 45 minutes. Carefully tip the loaf out onto a work surface and gently tap the bottom; if it sounds hollow, it is done. Cover with a towel and let cool before slicing.
Place your knife about 1/4 inch from the stem of the apple and cut downwards. Place apple cut side-down and continue cutting straight down all around the core. Discard core and cut apple pieces into cubes. Transfer apple cubes to a bowl. Spoon on yogurt and add granola.
Combine avocado, lemon juice, Greek yogurt, olive oil, garlic powder, onion powder, cumin, salt, and black pepper in a small food processor. Pulse until mixture is smooth. Add water or milk to thin out dressing to desired consistency. Set aside. Cook bacon in a medium nonstick skillet over medium heat until crispy, about 5 minutes. Drain on a paper towel-lined plate. Allow to cool; crumble into small pieces. Remove all but 1 tablespoon of bacon grease from the skillet. Add eggs; cover and cook until whites are set and yolks are barely set, 3 to 5 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. Divide mixed greens, tomatoes, cucumber slices, and bacon crumbles between 2 plates. Drizzle in desired amount of avocado dressing. Top each salad with an egg. Serve immediately.
Beat eggs, egg white, and milk together in a bowl until combined. Add parsley, thyme, garlic powder, chili powder, garlic, sazon, and adobo. Add sausages and mozzarella cheese and stir to combine. Place a skillet over medium heat and coat surface lightly with oil. Pour egg mixture into the hot skillet; cook and stir until firm and no longer runny, about 5 minutes.
Heat a deep, dry skillet over medium heat. Add vermicelli; cook and stir until lightly toasted, 1 to 3 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Heat oil in the skillet over medium heat. Add peanuts and cashews to the hot oil and fry until golden brown, 3 to 5 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Add chiles, garlic, ginger, cumin seeds, and mustard seeds to the skillet. Cook and stir until chiles are slightly tender, 1 to 3 minutes. Add onion and salt. Cover and cook until onion is translucent, 3 to 5 minutes more. Add water and bring to a boil. Add vermicelli, peanuts, and cashews to the skillet and stir continuously to avoid lumps, about 1 minute. Reduce heat to a simmer, cover skillet with a lid, and cook until smooth, about 5 minutes more.
Place lettuce leaves on a plate and set aside. Heat a small skillet over medium heat. Add butter and swirl to coat the skillet. Add onion and cook until soft, 3 to 4 minutes. Place American cheese on hamburger halves. Microwave for approximately 20 seconds to melt the cheese. Whisk eggs and milk together in a small bowl until slightly frothy. Pour egg mixture into the skillet. Cover skillet with a lid and cook until eggs are just set, about 5 minutes. Place hamburger halves on one side of the eggs. Top with onion, bacon, tomato, and pickle. Fold the other half of the eggs on top. Place omelet on the lettuce leaves and top with Thousand Island dressing.
Whisk egg whites and eggs together in a large bowl. Heat 1 teaspoon oil in a large frying pan over medium-high heat. Cook and stir hash browns until browned and crispy, about 5 minutes. Transfer hash browns to a large bowl. Heat 1 teaspoon oil in the same frying pan over medium heat. Add turkey, onion, and ham. Cook and stir until turkey is crumbly and onion softens, about 5 minutes. Add eggs; stir until scrambled and set, 5 to 7 minutes. Add cheese and let melt, about 3 minutes. Pour mixture into the bowl with the hash browns. Mix everything together. Plate tortillas. Add about 3 tablespoons of filling to each tortilla. Fold opposing edges of a tortilla to overlap the filling. Roll 1 of the opposing edges around the filling, creating a burrito. Repeat for remaining tortillas.
Melt 1 tablespoon butter in a skillet over medium heat. Whisk eggs and cheese together in a small bowl. Pour into the skillet; cook and stir until scrambled and set, 5 to 8 minutes. Remove from heat. Melt remaining 2 tablespoons butter in a separate pan. Add sausage, Worcestershire sauce, soy sauce, brown sugar, and seasoned salt. Cook and stir until sugar is dissolved and sausage is browned, 5 to 8 minutes. Divide scrambled eggs between 2 bowls. Place sausage mixture over the eggs. Drizzle pan drippings on top. Sprinkle bread crumbs over the bowls to create a crust.
Bring water to a boil in a pot. Add salt and cinnamon, stirring to evenly disperse the cinnamon. Stir in steel-cut oats and reduce heat to low. Simmer for 20 minutes. Add blueberries and cranberries to the oats. Simmer until oats begin to reach desired consistency, about 5 minutes. Add pecans; simmer for 3 to 5 minutes more. Add 1 cup of the cooked oats to each Mason jar. Screw lids on loosely and let cool on the counter until lids pop, about 30 minutes. Tighten caps and store in the refrigerator for up to 1 week.
Place strawberries, water, pitaya puree, pineapple, and banana in a large high-speed blender. Blend until smooth, stopping to scrape the jar as necessary. Taste and stir in maple syrup. Pour mixture into a bowl. Garnish with raspberries, almond butter, coconut flakes, pepitas, chia seeds, and bee pollen. Serve immediately.
Combine soy milk, oats, sugar, chia seeds, almonds, vanilla bean powder, salt, and cinnamon in a saucepan over medium heat. Cook and stir frequently until thickened to your preference, 5 to 7 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line 1 large or 2 smaller baking sheets with parchment paper. Mix peanut butter, maple syrup, flaxseed meal, vanilla extract, and cinnamon together in a large bowl. Add oats and coconut and mix until completely combined. Transfer mixture to the prepared baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven until toasted and fragrant, about 10 minutes. Add pumpkin seeds and stir the granola. Continue baking until evenly browned and dry to the touch, about 9 minutes more. Let granola cool slightly. Add raisins. Store granola in an airtight container.
Combine kefir, blueberries, banana, almond butter, and honey in a blender. Process until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (180 degrees C). Grease an 11x7-inch glass baking dish. Combine almond flour, Italian seasoning, and salt in a bowl; stir well. Mix in olive oil using a fork until mixture resembles breadcrumbs. Knead dough into a ball. Press down dough into the prepared baking dish to form the crust. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly golden, about 20 minutes.  Let cool for 5 minutes. Brush bottom with Dijon mustard. Cook bacon in a skillet over medium heat until crispy, about 3 minutes. Whisk eggs and heavy cream together in a bowl. Season with garlic, salt, ground black pepper, and ground nutmeg. Layer bacon pieces over the bottom of the almond-flour pastry; top with shredded Gouda cheese. Pour in egg mixture and place cherry tomatoes on top. Sprinkle with oregano. Bake in the preheated oven until set and golden, about 30 minutes.
Combine flour, salt, and xanthan gum in a bowl. Whisk eggs and milk together in a separate bowl. Make a well in the flour mixture and pour egg mixture in the center; mix until slightly combined. Add melted butter and mix until a soft batter is formed, 1 to 2 minutes. Cover and let stand for 45 minutes. Melt butter in an 8-inch skillet over medium heat. Pour 2 tablespoons of batter into the skillet and immediately rotate the skillet to spread batter out in a thin layer. Cook until the top of the crepe is no longer wet and the bottom has turned light brown, 1 to 2 minutes. Run a spatula around the edge of the skillet to loosen crepe; flip crepe and cook until the other side has turned light brown, about 1 minute more.
In medium saucepan, bring water to a boil. Stir in oats. Cook uncovered over medium heat, 1 minute for Quick Oats, 5 minutes for Old Fashioned Oats, stirring occasionally. Place berries, chia seeds, cinnamon, and ginger into blender or food processor container. Process until fruits are pureed. If mixture seems too thick, add water 1 tablespoon at a time to reach desired consistency. Swirl into bowl of cooked oats. Serve topped with yogurt, coconut, and honey.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Bacon Alfredo Sauce: Cook bacon in an oven-proof skillet over medium heat until well browned and crispy, about 10 minutes. Remove to paper towel-lined plate and reserve. Leave residual bacon fat in skillet. To bacon fat, add butter and heat until just melted. Add garlic and cook an additional 2 minutes. Add flour to skillet, stir to combine, and cook for 2 more minutes. Whisk in heavy cream and bring to slight simmer. Add in greens of choice (spinach or kale) and cook until just wilted. Stir in half of Parmesan cheese. Gently crack eggs into bacon Alfredo sauce and sprinkle with remaining Parmesan cheese. Bake until whites are just set, about 10 minutes. Season to taste and garnish with reserved cooked bacon. Serve with toasted bread.
Beat eggs in a bowl with a whisk. Add milk and season with salt and white pepper. Whisk for a few minutes until egg mixture is foamy; beating in air makes the omelette fluffy. Melt butter in a small, nonstick skillet over medium-low heat. Pour in egg mixture and twirl skillet so bottom is evenly covered with egg. Cook for 1 minute until egg starts to set. Lift edges with a spatula and tilt the skillet so uncooked egg mixture can run towards the bottom of the skillet to set. Repeat until no visible liquid egg remains. Carefully flip omelette and cook for another 30 seconds to 1 minute. Sprinkle Emmentaler cheese in one line in the middle of the omelette and fold omelette in half. Cook for 20 seconds, then slide omelette onto plate.
Melt 1 teaspoon butter in a small skillet over medium heat. Add mushrooms, bell pepper, and green onions; cook until tender, about 5 minutes. Stir in ham until heated through, about 1 minute. Season with salt and pepper. Set filling mixture aside in a small bowl and keep warm. Beat eggs together in a bowl; season with salt and pepper. Heat the same skillet over medium-high heat. Add remaining 1 teaspoon butter; heat until foaming. Pour in eggs and cook for 30 seconds. Lift the edges of the omelet so that the uncooked egg runs under the cooked edges and comes into contact with the hot skillet. Shake and tilt the skillet to move the uncooked egg. Repeat until the top is set but still moist and soft, about 2 minutes. Spread the filling over one side of the omelet. Fold the other half over the filling and slide omelet onto a plate.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat oil in an oven-safe skillet over medium heat and cook garlic until it starts to sizzle, about 1 minute. Add asparagus and mushrooms and cook until softened, 4 to 5 minutes. Season with salt and pour in white wine. Discard garlic. Mix eggs, milk, 2 tablespoons Parmesan cheese, parsley, salt, and pepper in a bowl. Pour into the skillet over the asparagus and mushrooms.; stir gently. Cook until eggs start to set, about 3 minutes. Sprinkle with remaining 1 tablespoon Parmesan cheese and transfer to the oven. Bake in the preheated oven until frittata has risen and is set, about 20 minutes. Cool slightly before serving.
Combine water, cornmeal, and salt in a bowl. Mix together and let sit until water is absorbed, about 5 minutes. Form dough into patties about 5 inches across and 1/2-inch thick. Coat a griddle with butter. Cook patties, one at a time, over medium-high heat until lightly browned, about 3 minutes per side.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a baking dish with 1 tablespoon coconut oil. Place grated sweet potatoes in the bottom of the baking dish. Heat 2 tablespoons coconut oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add sausage and onion. Cook and stir until sausage is browned and onion is translucent, about 5 minutes. Place mixture in the baking dish on top of the potatoes. Mix eggs, coconut milk, sage, salt, pepper, and garlic powder together in a bowl. Pour mixture into the baking pan. Bake in the preheated oven until set, about 45 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a baking dish with cooking spray. Spread sweet potatoes evenly over the bottom of the prepared dish. Heat a large saucepan over medium heat. Add turkey sausage and spinach; cook and stir until turkey is browned and spinach is wilted, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat. Add to sweet potatoes. Crack egg whites into a large bowl; add almond milk, sage, red pepper flakes, thyme, oregano, basil, nutmeg, salt, and pepper. Stir well. Pour egg mixture over the top of the casserole. Sprinkle with Parmesan cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until set, about 45 minutes. Cut casserole into 6 pieces.
Preheat an oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Prick potatoes several times with a fork and place onto a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until potatoes are soft, 50 minutes to 1 hour. Remove potatoes from oven and let cool until safe to handle, at least 15 minutes. Reduce oven temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a casserole dish or 9x13-inch pan with cooking spray. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes. Transfer sausage to a bowl. Saute onion in the same skillet until translucent, about 5 minutes. Transfer onion to the bowl with the cooked sausage. Mix eggs, half the Cheddar cheese, milk, salt, and pepper into the bowl with the sausage mixture. Grate potatoes and add to the bowl of sausage mixture. Pour mixture into the prepared dish; place remaining Cheddar cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until casserole is heated through and cheese is melted and bubbly, about 35 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F. Oil two 4 1/2-by-8 1/2-inch loaf pans. In a heavy pan, toast the oats over medium-high heat for 8 to 10 minutes until very fragrant and slightly golden. Stir frequently for even toasting and to avoid burning. Transfer to a bowl. To the bowl with the toasted oats, add the flour, baking powder, cinnamon, and salt. In another, larger bowl, beat together the sunflower butter, oil, and sugar until smooth. Beat in the egg. Then, carefully whisk in the almond milk so you don't splatter. Stir in the vanilla. Pour the dry ingredients into the wet and fold to combine. Stir in the diced apple and walnuts. Divide the batter between the two prepared pans. Bake for about 25 minutes, until golden and pulling away from the sides of the pans. Using an offset spatula, loosen the bars from the pans and invert onto a rack to cool completely. When cool, cut each pan crosswise into 8 bars. Store in the fridge.
Combine almond flour, baking powder, sugar, and salt in a bowl; mix well. Stir in mashed banana, almond milk, and vegetable oil until well combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Place chicken breasts between 2 sheets of heavy plastic on a solid, level surface. Firmly pound with the smooth side of a meat mallet to an even thickness. Place panko and 1/3 cup flour into separate shallow bowls. Combine 1 egg, milk, and Dijon mustard in another shallow bowl. Dip each chicken breast into the mixture; coat in the panko mixture. Place breaded chicken breasts on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until no longer pink in the center and the juices run clear, 25 to 30 minutes. An instant-read thermometer inserted into the center should read at least 165 degrees F (74 degrees C). Reduce oven temperature to 200 degrees F (95 degrees C). Combine 1 cup flour, whole wheat flour, baking soda, and salt in a bowl. Mix buttermilk, 1 egg, and 2 tablespoons butter together in another bowl. Whisk gently into the flour mixture. Beat together until batter is smooth. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Add about 1/2 cup batter into the preheated waffle iron. Cook until waffle is golden brown and the iron stops steaming, about 5 minutes. Transfer waffle to a wire rack set over a baking sheet; place in the oven to keep warm. Repeat with the remaining batter. Heat 3 tablespoons butter in a heavy saucepan over medium heat. Add 3 tablespoons flour; cook, stirring constantly, until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes. Whisk in chicken stock slowly. Increase heat to medium-high; bring gravy to a boil. Cook, stirring constantly, until thickened, about 10 minutes. Season with salt and pepper; stir in maple syrup. Reduce heat to low until ready to serve over the baked chicken and waffles.
Stir Greek yogurt, honey, protein powder, instant coffee, cocoa powder, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Combine strawberries and raspberries in a second bowl. Layer ingredients into a glass in the following order: 1/3 cup yogurt, 1/2 cup berries, 1/3 cup yogurt, 1/2 cup granola, and 1/3 cup yogurt. Sprinkle with some granola and garnish with a piece of fruit. Fill a second glass in the same way with the remaining ingredients, reserving some granola and fruit for garnish.
Combine flour, potato flakes, baking powder, and salt together in a large bowl. Preheat a waffle iron. Whisk milk, eggs, and oil together in a small bowl. Stir into the flour mixture until just moistened. Fold Cheddar cheese, bacon, and green onions into the batter. Pour batter into the preheated waffle iron. Bake according to manufacturer's directions, until golden brown, about 6 minutes. Repeat with the remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place pizza crusts on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned, about 5 minutes. Remove from oven and leave oven on. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage until browned, 5 to 7 minutes. Remove sausage with a slotted spoon; drain on a paper towel-lined plate. Reduce heat of skillet to medium-low. Melt 1 tablespoon butter in the skillet. Add flour; stir until dissolved to make a roux, about 1 minute. Add half-and-half; stir to remove browned bits from bottom of the skillet. Cook and stir until thick, about 2 minutes. Season gravy with pepper, salt, and onion powder. Return the drained sausage to the skillet; stir to coat with the gravy. Remove from heat; divide sausage gravy evenly over the pizza crusts. Melt the remaining butter in a small nonstick saucepan over low heat. Pour in eggs; cook and stir until scrambled, 3 to 4 minutes. Remove from heat; divide scrambled eggs evenly over the pizzas. Top with Swiss cheese and Cheddar cheese. Bake in the hot oven until cheese is melted, 3 to 4 minutes.
Mix all-purpose flour, buckwheat flour, and baking powder together in a bowl. Cut in shortening with 2 knives or a pastry blender until the mixture resembles coarse crumbs. Beat egg yolk lightly in a separate bowl. Mix in milk and molasses. Pour into the flour mixture; mix batter until no dry spots remain. Beat egg white in a separate bowl until stiff. Fold into the batter. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Pour batter into 4-inch cakes on the griddle. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place all ingredients in a powerful blender; blend until smooth.
Heat a large skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned, 5 to 7 minutes. Drain and discard grease. Stir in flour until dissolved; add 2 cups milk. Stir occasionally until gravy reaches desired consistency, about 10 minutes. Season gravy with black pepper. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place pizza crust on a baking sheet; brush with olive oil. Spread 1/2 of the gravy over the olive oil. Spray a large skillet with cooking spray; warm over medium-high heat. Whisk eggs and 1/4 cup milk together in a bowl. Pour into the skillet; cook and stir until eggs are set, about 5 minutes. Top pizza with scrambled eggs and Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until crust is golden brown and top is bubbling, 10 to 15 minutes.
Mix flour, eggs, and salt together in a bowl until smooth and creamy. Lightly coat a small skillet with cooking spray. Pour 2 to 3 tablespoons of batter into the skillet. Swirl around until even and then place skillet over medium heat. Cook until sides begin to curl away, about 2 minutes. Turn and cook other side until lightly browned, about 1 minute more. Put onto a plate. Mix cream cheese, raisins, sugar, egg yolks, lemon peel, vanilla extract, and cinnamon together in a bowl to make the filling. Place 2 to 3 teaspoons of filling on each blintz and roll up like a small burrito. Melt 1 tablespoon butter in a skillet over medium heat. Cook the filled blintzes, turning carefully, until lightly browned, about 30 seconds each.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add broccoli; cook until tender, about 5 minutes. Drain and let cool, about 10 minutes. Transfer to a pan with 2-inch sides. Whisk eggs, milk, paprika, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Pour over broccoli. Bake in the preheated oven until edges are golden, about 35 minutes.
Whisk rice flour, eggs, almond milk, sugar, and salt together in a large bowl until well mixed. Combine water and 3 tablespoons coconut oil in a separate bowl until well blended. Whisk into the flour mixture. Pour batter through a sieve into a clean bowl; cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate for 1 hour. Heat remaining coconut oil in a griddle over medium heat. Ladle a portion of the batter into the pan and spread out. Cook until set, about 30 seconds per side. Repeat with the remaining batter.
Butter the muffins, top with the fresh basil, add some Galbani(R) Mozzarella Fresca(TM) slices and a slice of tomato. Add the poached egg. Drizzle with hollandaise, add some chives, add salt and pepper to taste. Serve immediately.
Combine all smoothie ingredients into a blender. Blend until smooth. Remove and pour into a bowl. Garnish with assorted toppings. Enjoy!
Mix gluten-free pancake mix, water, egg, buckwheat flour, and vegetable oil together in a bowl until there are no lumps. Add additional water if needed to thin batter. Let batter sit for 15 minutes for fluffier pancakes. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-low heat. Pour 1/4 cup batter onto the hot griddle and cook until golden brown, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook until opposite side is golden brown, about 1 minute more.
Melt 2 tablespoons butter in a microwave-safe dish for 10 seconds. Let cool. Whisk egg yolk into cooled butter with a fork. Sift flour and baking powder into a large bowl; stir in sugar. Whisk in egg-butter mixture and 3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons buttermilk until a smooth, thick batter forms. Add more buttermilk, 1 tablespoon at a time, if batter is too thick. Melt 1 teaspoon butter in a nonstick skillet over high heat. Reduce heat and pour batter onto the hot skillet using a ladle. Cook until bubbles form and edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Transfer to a warm plate. Repeat with remaining batter. Use a large heart-shaped cookie cutter to cut out hearts. Place a few chocolate pieces on top of 1 warm pancake and sandwich another pancake on top. Repeat with remaining pancakes. Sprinkle with confectioners' sugar.
Combine vodka, tomato juice, tomato and clam juice, lemon juice, lime juice, Worcestershire sauce, horseradish, black pepper, pepper sauce, and celery salt in a large pitcher. Add ice and pour cocktail into glasses; serve each with a lime wedge.
Combine rolled oats, chai tea, almond milk, and apple butter in a jar or bowl. Refrigerate until oats are soft, 2 hours to overnight. Stir before eating.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Whisk eggs and milk together in a bowl; season with salt and pepper. Spray a large skillet with cooking spray; heat over medium-high heat. Pour egg mixture into the skillet; cook and stir until eggs are set, about 5 minutes. Add sausage, bacon, tomatoes, and mushrooms, and cook until vegetables are soft, about 3 minutes. Spread scrambled mixture over flatbread; top with shredded Monterey Jack cheese. Bake flatbread pizza in the preheated oven until the cheese is bubbly and underside of the crust is golden brown, 5 to 7 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Combine butternut squash, sweet potatoes, olive oil, salt, and pepper in a storage container. Cover with lid and shake well until fully coated. Place vegetables onto a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until vegetables are easily pierced with a fork, about 45 minutes. Place chicken sausage in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Reduce heat to medium-low; add eggs, spinach, and red pepper flakes. Cook and stir until eggs are set, about 5 minutes. Mix in black beans; cook until heated through, about 1 minute. Add goat cheese. Fill pita breads with scrambled eggs and baked vegetables.
Combine acai pulp, 2/3 of the banana, and 2 tablespoons of soy milk in a blender; blend until smooth, but still thick. Add more soy milk as needed; smoothie should have the consistency of frozen yogurt. Slice the remaining banana. Pour thick smoothie into a bowl and top with granola and sliced bananas.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Spread oats and pecans in a shallow baking pan. Bake 10 to 15 minutes or until lightly toasted. Transfer oat mixture to a large bowl and add brown sugar, baking powder, salt, cinnamon, and nutmeg. In a medium bowl, combine eggs, Carnation Breakfast Essentials(R) Classic French Vanilla Ready-To-Drink, butter, and vanilla. Add egg mixture and 1 cup of the blueberries to the oats mixture and stir to combine. Transfer mixture to a 2-quart square baking dish. Top with remaining 1/2 cup blueberries. Bake 30 minutes or until the top is golden brown and a knife inserted near the center comes out clean. Serve warm. If desired, serve with yogurt and/or additional fruit.
Whisk milk, eggs, and vegetable oil together in a bowl. Sift in all-purpose flour and buckwheat flour gradually, stirring constantly, until batter is quite runny. Melt butter in an 8-inch skillet or crepe pan over medium heat. Pour 1/4 cup batter into the skillet. Rotate the skillet until batter coats the bottom in a thin layer. Cook until the top of the crepe is no longer wet and the bottom has turned light brown, 1 to 2 minutes. Run a spatula around the edge of the skillet to loosen crepe; flip crepe and cook until the other side has turned light brown, about 1 minute more. Transfer to a cooling rack. Repeat with the remaining batter, whisking gently before using.
In a 1-pint canning jar, stir together the oats, cocoa, cinnamon, and salt. Pour milk over mixture. Seal jar and chill overnight. When serving, stir and top with chocolate baking chips and drizzle with honey. Add your favorite toppings. We suggest strawberry and banana slices or nuts and dried fruit.
Spray a small slow cooker lightly with cooking spray. Mix oats, 1/2 cup brown sugar, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a large bowl. Stir in pumpkin. Stir in water and half-and-half gradually. Stir in raisins and vanilla extract. Ladle oat mixture into the slow cooker. Cook on Low until oats are soft and creamy, 7 1/2 to 8 1/2 hours. Sprinkle 2 tablespoons plus 2 teaspoons brown sugar and 5 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon walnuts over oatmeal.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Arrange pie shells on a rimmed baking sheet. Mix milk, eggs, chives, hot sauce, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Divide Italian cheese blend, bacon, and sun-dried tomatoes evenly among the pie shells. Cover evenly with beaten egg mixture. Bake in preheated oven until eggs are set, about 30 minutes.
Combine 1 cup quinoa, 1 cup brown rice, almond milk, honey, brown sugar, and salt in a pot over medium heat; stir until almond milk is heated through, about 5 minutes. Whisk egg in a small bowl. Mix in some of the hot milk mixture to gradually warm up the egg to room temperature. Pour egg mixture into the saucepan. Add remaining 1/2 cup quinoa, 1/2 cup brown rice, vanilla extract, and pumpkin pie spice. Bring to a boil; reduce heat and simmer until mixture begins to thicken, 10 to 15 minutes. Scoop mixture into 2 serving bowls.
Mix potatoes, flour, and salt together in a bowl; add egg and mix well. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat for 2 minutes. Spoon batter into skillet, spreading to form two to three 6- to 8-inch pancakes. Reduce heat to medium and fry until golden and crisp, about 3 minutes per side. Serve pancakes alongside pickle juice.
Combine sliced sausage, brown sugar, white vinegar, and soy sauce in a large plastic bag. Seal and marinate in the refrigerate, 2 hours to overnight. Pour sausage mixture into a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add water and vegetable oil; cook and stir until liquid is reduced and sausage is browned, about 15 minutes.
Mix oats, flour, protein powder, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Place bananas, milk, eggs, brown sugar, and vanilla extract in a blender; blend until smooth. Slowly add oats mixture to banana mixture while blender is running until batter is smooth. Heat a skillet or griddle over medium-low heat; add butter. Pour batter over hot butter, about 1/4 cup per pancake; dot with chocolate chips. Cook until pancakes begin to bubble and edges are dry, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip and cook until other side is done, 3 to 5 minutes more.
Whisk eggs, soy sauce, oyster sauce, and sesame oil together in a glass measuring cup. Add enough water to make 1 cup; whisk until blended. Heat vegetable oil in an 11-inch nonstick omelet pan over medium-high heat. Cook and stir ginger and garlic until browned, 1 to 2 minutes. Discard ginger and garlic. Cook and stir bean sprouts, pork loin, chicken breast, mushrooms, and green onions in the same skillet until heated through, about 2 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Reheat skillet over medium-high heat. Pour in 1/2 cup egg mixture, tilting skillet to coat the bottom. Cook for 30 seconds. Spread half of the bean sprout mixture over one side of the egg layer. Reduce heat to low; cook until eggs are set, 3 to 5 minutes. Fold over omelet and slide onto a plate. Repeat with remaining 1/2 cup egg mixture and bean sprout mixture to make second omelet.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a 9x13-inch baking dish or jelly roll pan with parchment paper. Mix oats, walnuts, brown sugar, dried fruit, all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, wheat germ, cinnamon, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk oil, honey, egg, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl; stir into oats mixture until batter is just mixed. Spread batter into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown around the edges, 20 to 25 minutes. Cool slightly on a wire rack; cut into 12 bars while still warm using a pizza cutter.
Whisk multigrain flour, quinoa flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt together in a large bowl. Mash coconut oil with a fork in a bowl; whisk into flour mixture until well mixed. Measure 1 cup mixture, reserving the rest in a large container with a lid in the refrigerator for another use. Mix the 1 cup flour-coconut oil mixture, milk, and egg together in a bowl until batter is well mixed. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Warm canola oil in a small skillet. Stir turmeric into oil; immediately add eggs. Pour in water; cover and cook until firm, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip eggs and lay Cheddar cheese on top. Cover until melted, about 1 minute. Add ketchup.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Beat egg whites in a glass, metal, or ceramic bowl with an electric mixer until stiff peaks form. Mix egg yolks in a separate bowl using a hand beater. Beat in rice milk, rice flour, tapioca starch, oil, almond meal, sugar, baking powder, vanilla extract, and salt just until smooth. Fold in stiff egg whites. Spray the preheated waffle iron with cooking spray. Cook waffles until golden brown and the iron stops steaming, about 5 minutes per waffle.
Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Spread 1 tablespoon butter over bread slices. Place buttered side-down in a grill pan; cook until crispy, about 3 minutes. Place 2 bread slices grilled side-down on a baking sheet. Combine the remaining 3 tablespoons butter, parsley, Parmesan cheese, mustard, garlic, and pepper in a bowl. Spread over bread on the baking sheet. Broil in the preheated oven until golden brown, about 4 minutes. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Place eggs in the same skillet; cook over medium-high heat until whites are set on the bottom, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip over to cook the other side until whites are completely set, about 1 minute more. Layer bacon and eggs over the broiled bread and top with the 2 grilled slices.
Beat eggs in a bowl. Stir in coconut milk, salt, and pepper until well combined. Heat a skillet over medium-low heat; pour in egg mixture. Cook and stir until fluffy and firm, 5 to 7 minutes.
Place egg yolks, lemon juice, and hot sauce in a blender. Blend until eggs are a pale yellow, about 30 seconds to 1 minute. While the motor is running, add the butter in a slow steady stream until it is all incorporated. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Combine the balsamic vinegar and honey in a small pan. Bring to a boil over high heat; reduce heat to medium and let simmer until reduced by about half, 20 to 30 minutes, stirring occasionally. Remove from heat. Combine corned beef hash, beaten egg, breadcrumbs, and parsley in a mixing bowl. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Measure corned beef mixture into 6 patties using a 1/4-cup measuring cup. Place them in skillet; Reduce heat to medium. Fry until just starting to brown, about 3 minutes per side. Remove from heat. Fill a large saucepan with 2 to 3 inches of water and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to medium-low, pour in vinegar, and keep the water at a gentle simmer. Crack an egg into a small bowl then gently slip egg into the simmering water, holding the bowl just above the surface of water. Repeat with the remaining eggs. Cook eggs until the whites are firm and the yolks have thickened but are not hard, 2 1/2 to 3 minutes. Remove the eggs from the water with a slotted spoon, dab on a kitchen towel to remove excess water, and place onto a warm plate. To plate, place one hash cake on a plate, top with a handful of arugula. Place a poached egg over the arugula and drizzle with hollandaise and glaze. Season with salt and pepper.
Preheat waffle iron. In a medium bowl, stir together all ingredients until dry ingredients are moistened. Coat top and bottom of waffle iron with non-stick cooking spray. Pour about 3/4 cup batter onto center of waffle iron bottom; close lid. Cook until crisp and golden brown, according to waffle iron manufacturer's directions.
Mix chickpea flour, cinnamon, baking powder, stevia powder, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk milk, egg whites, and vegetable oil together in a separate bowl. Pour over the chickpea flour mixture; whisk until batter is just combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Pour 1/2 cup portions onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Mix oats, coconut milk, and chia seeds together in a bowl. Toss apples and lemon juice together in a bowl until coated; fold into oat mixture. Stir strawberries, blueberries, and maple syrup into oat mixture. Refrigerate for 8 hours to overnight.
Combine quinoa flour, tapioca flour, ground flax seeds, baking powder, potato flour, potato starch, salt, baking soda, and xanthan gum in a large bowl. Whisk water and egg together in a separate bowl. Pour over quinoa flour mixture; mix until batter is well blended. Mix in 3 tablespoons oil. Heat 1 teaspoon grapeseed oil in a skillet over medium heat. Drop 1/3 cup batter into the skillet and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place potatoes in a large glass bowl; cover and microwave on HIGH for 4 minutes. Meanwhile, cook bacon in a large deep skillet over medium heat until crisp. Remove bacon to drain on paper toweling; drain all but 3 tablespoons fat from the skillet. Add bell pepper, onion, and garlic to skillet. Cook and stir over medium-high heat until tender. Stir in par-cooked potatoes, ham, and cooked bacon. Season with salt and pepper; cook and stir 4 minutes longer. Add spinach to skillet; cover and cook until wilted. Continue cooking until hash is browned on bottom. Make 4 wells in center of the hash; crack an egg into each well. Reduce heat to medium and cook about 5 minutes or until eggs are set. Sprinkle with dill and more freshly ground pepper, if desired.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a loaf pan. Whisk flour, baking soda, baking powder, cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt together in a bowl. Mix banana, white sugar, brown sugar, egg white, milk, canola oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl; stir into flour mixture just until batter is moistened. Fold sesame seeds and walnuts into batter; pour into prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, 35 to 40 minutes. Cool in pan before transferring to a wire rack to cool completely.
Combine bread flour, sugar, salt, and yeast in the bowl of a stand mixer using the dough hook on low speed; mix in eggs until fully incorporated. Mix in warm water and milk until fully incorporated. Add butter and mix until fully incorporated. Continue mixing until dough holds together. Take a piece of dough between your fingers and pull them apart. If the dough stays connected and becomes translucent, it is ready. Add milk or flour if needed to reach this consistency. Allow dough to rise until doubled in size, about 1 hour. Divide dough into 4 or 5 loaves and shape into greased loaf pans. Rise again until edges are roughly 1 inch below the top of the pan, 30 to 60 minutes. Create a 2-inch vertical slit across the top of each loaf using a knife or scissors. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until bread reaches an internal temperature of 200 degrees F (93 degrees C), about 20 minutes.
Combine yogurt, coconut water, strawberries, peaches, mango, banana, and 1 tablespoon chia seeds in a blender; blend until smooth. Pour smoothie into a bowl and top with remaining 1 tablespoon chia seeds.
Combine blueberries, milk, protein powder, and peanut butter in a blender; blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a baking dish with cooking spray. Combine oats, walnuts, 1/2 of the blueberries, maple syrup, cinnamon, and baking powder in a large bowl. Whisk milk, egg, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Spread oat mixture in the baking dish and pour milk mixture over the top. Shake the dish slightly to help milk sink into the oats. Add remaining blueberries and banana slices. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 35 to 40 minutes. Cool before slicing, 10 to 15 minutes.
Combine milk, oats, coconut, brown sugar, beaten eggs, golden raisins, chocolate chips, vanilla extract, and salt in a large bowl; mix well. Pour mixture into a 1.8-quart baking dish. Cover and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until edges are firm and center is still slightly soft, about 45 minutes. Stir before serving.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a loaf pan with butter. Combine flour, sugar, coconut, baking powder, and salt in a large bowl; stir once or twice with a wooden spoon. Add eggs, milk, water, oil, coconut extract, vanilla extract, and cinnamon. Mix well until batter is blended. Pour batter into the greased loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 1 hour. Cool in the pan for 15 minutes. Invert onto a wire rack to cool completely.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a loaf pan with cooking spray. Combine flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a small bowl. Mix yogurt, sugar, eggs, and vanilla extract together in a large bowl. Stir in flour mixture a little at a time, mixing well between each addition to avoid lumps. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 45 minutes.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Mix flour, water, coconut oil, sugar, apple cider vinegar, baking powder, cinnamon, and salt together in a bowl until batter is smooth. Ladle batter into the waffle iron and cook according to manufacturer's instructions until crisp, about 5 minutes.
Combine flour, milk, water, eggs, and melted butter in a large bowl; beat with a wire whisk until crepe batter is free of lumps. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Pour 1/4 cup of batter into the skillet; cook until bubbles form on the surface, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook crepe for 1 minute on the second side. Transfer to a plate. Repeat with remaining crepe batter. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Pour pinto beans into a small saucepan over medium heat; cook until heated through, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat and let cool slightly. Mash into a fine puree using a potato masher. Combine salsa, tomatoes, corn, ginger, and chili powder in a large bowl. Mix in pureed beans. Spoon some of the bean mixture into the center of each crepe. Roll up crepes, tucking ends in neatly. Place filled crepes seam-side down on the lined baking sheet. Sprinkle grated Monterey Jack cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until cheese is melted, about 10 minutes.
Add Quaker(R) Oats to a container of your choice and pour in Chai Tea Latte. Layer on yogurt and top with honey and pomegranate seeds. Refrigerate overnight and enjoy in the morning!
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place butter in a 9x13-inch baking dish and place in the preheating oven until melted, about 5 minutes. Beat milk, flour, eggs, sugar, and salt together in a bowl until batter is smooth. Pour melted butter from baking dish into batter and beat until smooth. Pour batter into the baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until cooked through, 20 to 25 minutes.
Beat egg white in a bowl using an electric mixer until soft peaks form; mix in lemon juice, stevia powder, and lemon zest. Spoon ground coffee into a French press; add boiling water and cover. Let steep for 3 to 5 minutes. Combine Scotch and honey in a glass; pour in coffee and mix well. Top coffee with lemon-flavored egg white.
In a blender, combine mango, kale, almond milk, orange juice, stevia, and chia seeds. Blend until smooth.
Combine water and flax seeds in a small bowl. Refrigerate until mixture thickens and has an egg-like consistency, 15 to 30 minutes. Stir in almond milk, banana, zucchini, and vanilla extract. Mix flour, cocoa powder, brown sugar baking blend, baking powder, baking soda, cinnamon, and sea salt together in a bowl. Pour in flax mixture; stir until batter is just combined. Heat a large griddle over medium heat and spray with cooking spray. Drop 1/3 cup batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and bottoms are golden brown, about 5 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 4 to 6 minutes. Transfer to a baking rack to cool. Repeat with remaining batter.
Combine bananas, kale, blueberries, almond milk, water, ground flax seeds, and dates in a blender; blend until smooth.
Place bacon and sausage in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices and sausage on paper towels; crumble bacon and dice sausage. Whisk eggs, 3-cheese blend, and jalapeno pepper together in a bowl; add sausage. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir egg mixture until cooked through and scrambled, 3 to 5 minutes. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat; cook and stir hash brown potatoes until cooked through and browned, about 10 minutes. Spoon scrambled eggs onto a plate and top with salsa and bacon. Serve potatoes alongside eggs.
Combine almond milk, banana, dark chocolate, and protein powder in a blender; blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a muffin tin with coconut oil. Combine spinach and eggs in a food processor; pulse until blended. Add chickpeas; pulse until blended. Add nutritional yeast, Parmesan cheese, paprika, salt, and pepper; pulse until evenly incorporated. Pour spinach mixture into the prepared muffin tin, filling each cup 2/3 full. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 25 minutes.
Place almond milk, pumpkin puree, banana, protein powder, and pumpkin pie spice in a blender. Blend until smooth, 15 to 30 seconds. If mixture is too thick, add more almond milk or water to achieve desired consistency.
Combine strawberries, oats, Greek yogurt, applesauce, egg whites, chocolate chips, almond milk, baking powder, cinnamon, almond extract, and salt in a blender; blend until batter is smooth and slightly runny. Preheat a skillet over medium-high heat; spray with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 cup batter into the hot skillet. Cook pancake until bubbles form, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Transfer to a cooking rack. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place milk, pineapple, ice, Carnation Breakfast Essentials Drink, banana and pineapple juice in blender; cover. Blend until smooth.
Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat, about 1 minute. Pour melted butter into a bowl. Add milk, egg, and honey; blend well. Stir in flour and cinnamon until batter is just combined. Drop spoonfuls of batter into the buttered skillet. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Squeeze lemon juice over pancakes. Sprinkle confectioners' sugar on top.
Whisk together the maple syrup, brown sugar, and 1/2 teaspoon pumpkin pie spice. Line a rimmed baking sheet with foil. Place a baking rack on top of the foil and spray generously with non-stick cooking spray. Place bacon slices across the rack making sure to not overlap. Turn oven to 400 degrees F and bake bacon for 15 to 20 minutes. (Do not preheat the oven.) Carefully remove the baking sheet from the oven and brush bacon with maple glaze. Return to the oven for another 7 to 8 minutes. Carefully remove the baking sheet from the oven and, using a pair of tongs, flip bacon over. Brush with the maple glaze. Return baking sheet to the oven and bake for another 5 to 7 minutes or until bacon reaches your desired level of crispness. Remove the baking sheet from the oven (last time!) and let the bacon rest for 5 minutes before removing. Roughly chop bacon into bite-size pieces. Reserve 1/4 cup for topping the waffles later. Whisk together the pancake mix, milk, pumpkin, oil, and pumpkin pie spice just until blended. Add bacon and stir to combine. Preheat waffle iron; cook waffles according to manufacturer's instructions. Top waffles with freshly whipped cream, maple bacon, pumpkin pie spice, and maple syrup.
Place all ingredients in blender; cover. Blend until smooth. Pour into glass and enjoy!
Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add mushrooms; cook and stir until mushrooms are browned and release their moisture, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat, drain, and pat dry. Beat eggs, sugar, salt, pepper, and red chile powder together in a bowl. Coat the skillet with some vegetable oil; set over medium heat. Pour in some of the beaten eggs, tilting skillet to spread into a thin layer. Cook until almost set, 1 to 2 minutes. Run a heatproof rubber spatula around the edges to loosen. Cover with some mushrooms; roll up egg and move to the side of the skillet. Grease skillet with some more vegetable oil. Pour in more eggs to create a second layer. Lift the first roll up to get raw egg underneath. Sprinkle mozzarella cheese on top; roll second layer up over the first. Repeat layering and rolling process with remaining oil, eggs, mushrooms, and mozzarella cheese. Cook finished tamagoyaki until lightly browned, about 30 seconds per side. Transfer tamagoyaki to a cutting board. Let cool for 5 to 10 minutes before slicing.
Place tomatoes into a food processor; blend until smooth. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Stir in tomatoes, salt, and pepper; cook and stir until all liquid has evaporated from the tomatoes, 10 to 15 minutes. Reduce heat to medium. Add eggs; cook, stirring constantly, until mixture is evenly dry and no large chunks remain, 7 to 10 minutes.
Combine spinach, kale, pear, banana, blueberries, yogurt, ice cubes, and ground flax seeds in a blender; pour in tea. Blend on high until mixture is smooth. Mix with a wooden spoon to redistribute ingredients if needed.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Whisk milk, yogurt, butter, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Mix gluten-free flour, chocolate chips, oat flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Stir milk mixture into the flour mixture until well incorporated. Let batter stand, about 10 minutes. Pour 1/2 cup of batter onto the preheated iron and bake until crisp and golden, according to manufacturer's instructions, about 3 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack to cool. Repeat with remaining batter.
Break bananas into pieces; place into blender. Add apricots and dates; pour in almond milk. Blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place potato nuggets in a large microwave-safe bowl. Heat in the microwave until thawed, 1 to 2 minutes. Add butter and salt; mash together until potato nuggets are crumbled. Press evenly into a glass pie dish to make crust. Bake crust in the preheated oven until golden brown, 20 to 25 minutes. Reduce oven temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Combine Cheddar cheese, ham, Parmesan cheese, and flour in a bowl. Beat 4 eggs in a bowl until smooth. Add milk, onion, green bell pepper, salt, onion powder, and garlic powder. Stir into Cheddar cheese mixture until combined. Pour over crust. Bake in the preheated oven until set and golden, about 45 minutes. Let cool before slicing, 10 to 15 minutes.
Mix water, oats, and a dash of salt together in a microwave-safe bowl. Microwave on 50% power until oatmeal is chewy and tender, about 5 minutes. Stir. Mix in butter, seasoning blend, salt, and pepper. Let stand for 1 minute before serving.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels; crumble into small pieces. Beat 3 eggs in a small bowl until smooth; pour into the hot skillet. Cook, stirring, over medium heat until scrambled and set, about 5 minutes. Preheat a cake pop maker according to manufacturer's instructions. Combine remaining egg, baking mix, milk, and vegetable oil in a large bowl to make pancake batter. Fold crumbled bacon, scrambled eggs, and Cheddar cheese gently into the batter. Fill wells of preheated cake pop machine with batter. Cook until golden brown, 4 to 6 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Combine bananas, cream, basil, maple syrup, and ice cubes in a food processor or blender; blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place butter in a cast iron skillet. Place skillet in the preheating oven until butter melts, about 5 minutes. Combine eggs and milk in a bowl; whisk until combined. Whisk in tapioca flour, coconut flour, lemon juice, lemon zest, and sea salt until combined. Fold blueberries into the batter. Remove skillet from oven using a pot holder or kitchen towel. Spread melted butter with a pastry brush to coat skillet evenly; pour in batter. Bake in the preheated oven until middle is firm and top is golden brown, 18 to 20 minutes. Slice and drizzle with maple syrup.
Combine soy milk, tofu, maple syrup, and cocoa powder in a blender; pulse until smooth. Add strawberries; blend until smooth.
Grind oats in a blender into a powder-like consistency. Add ice cubes; pulse until ground. Add banana, avocado, and strawberries; blend until smooth. Pour in carrot juice and yogurt; blend until combined.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Lightly spray a 3-quart casserole dish (or a 13x9-inch pan) with nonstick cooking spray. Brown the sausage in a skillet and crumble it as it cooks. Remove to a paper towel to drain any excess grease. Roll up the crescent rolls according to your package instructions and line them up in the casserole dish (it is okay if they touch). Whisk together the eggs, milk, apple butter and optional cheese. Scatter the cooked sausage over the top of the crescent rolls in the dish. Pour the egg mixture over the top. Bake for 35-40 minutes or until the eggs have completely set in the center.
Mix flour, oats, sugar, cocoa powder, chia seeds, baking powder, and salt together in a large bowl. Add 3 cups almond milk and coconut oil; stir with a wooden spoon until batter is just combined. Cover and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Preheat a Belgian waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Stir 1 1/2 to 2 cups almond milk into the batter to thin it to the consistency of cake batter. Scoop 1/2 cup batter onto the preheated iron and spread to the edges. Close iron and cook until iron stops steaming, about 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Mix pancake mix and pudding mix together in a bowl; add milk and eggs and stir until batter is smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
In medium bowl, whisk together 2 eggs and milk; dip bread into egg mixture until fully coated. Cook French toast on griddle or large skillet over medium heat until golden brown on both sides. Cook sausage patties according to package instructions. Cut into strips. In separate skillet, heat olive oil over medium heat. Add garlic, peppers and onions and saute until browned and tender. Add cooked sausage strips to pepper and onion mixture; top with cheese and heat until cheese is melted. Cook remaining eggs over easy, or as desired. Assemble cheesesteaks by layering french toast with eggs, and pepper, sausage and cheese mixture. Season with salt & pepper and serve open-faced.
Combine pineapple chunks, milk, banana, honey, and vanilla extract in a blender; blend until smooth.
Combine mixed berries, bananas, almond milk, almond butter, and cinnamon in a blender; blend, adding more almond milk for a thinner smoothie, until smooth and creamy. Add cherries and continue blending until smooth.
Preheat your waffle cone maker and spray with non-stick cooking spray. In a medium size bowl, whisk together 2 large eggs. Over medium heat, heat a small skillet with a tablespoon of oil until hot. Pour in eggs. As eggs begin to set, slowly pull them the skillet with a spatula, forming soft curds. Continue cooking, until desired doneness. Remove from heat. Meanwhile, mix waffle batter according to package directions. Pour 1/4 of the batter into the waffle cone maker, making sure to spread it out evenly. Close lid and cook for about 1 minute before checking for doneness. Cook until browned to your liking. Immediately, place done waffle cones into taco holder to form shape. Stuff with scrambled eggs, then top with bacon, jalapenos, and chives.
Cook hash browns according to package directions and set aside. Brown sausage patties according to package directions. Heat frying pan to medium heat. Butter one side of each piece of bread. Place two bread slices, buttered side down, in skillet. Top each slice with two slices Havarti or Gouda, sausage, hash browns and two slices Cheddar cheese. Top with remaining slice of bread, buttered side up. Cook for 3-4 minutes or until lightly browned. Before flipping, press sandwich down with spatula. Flip and cook for an additional 3-4 minutes or until golden brown and cheese is melted.
Mix amaro and grapefruit juice together in a chilled Collins glass; top with beer.
Place kale and spinach in a blender; blend until leaves become finely chopped. Add pineapple juice and orange juice; blend until smooth. Add pineapple and mango; blend until smooth.
Whisk egg whites and eggs together in a bowl; add hot sauce and pepper. Heat coconut oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add sweet potato and kale; cook and stir until kale is wilted, about 5 minutes. Stir egg mixture into sweet potato mixture; cook, stirring constantly, until egg is cooked and set, about 5 minutes. Transfer egg mixture to serving plates and top with salsa.
Combine oats, almond milk, water, and salt in a small saucepan over high heat until starting to boil, 1 to 2 minutes. Stir peanut butter into oatmeal until dissolved, 1 to 2 minutes. Continue cooking and stirring for 2 minutes more. Lower heat and stir in cinnamon; cook for 1 to 2 minutes. Remove oatmeal from heat and stir in banana and vanilla extract.
Whisk eggs together in a bowl until mixture is evenly yellow; add kefir, flour, white sugar, brown sugar, salt, and baking soda and mix until batter is smooth. Coat a skillet with oil and place over high heat. Pour batter into the hot skillet, working in batches as needed, forming 3-inch pancakes; cook until batter starts bubbling and bottom is golden brown, 1 to 1 1/2 minutes. Flip and continue frying until pancake is golden brown, about 1 minute.
Combine grapes, apple juice, kefir, banana, pineapple, and dates, in this order, in a blender; blend until smooth.
Combine milk, strawberries, and avocado in a blender; blend until smooth, about 1 minute.
Combine 2 cups flour, yeast, salt, and sugar in a large bowl. Add warm water and olive oil; stir with a wooden spoon until well blended. Slowly mix in remaining 1 cup flour until dough holds together and isn't sticky. Cover bowl with plastic wrap and refrigerate until doubled in size, about 3 hours. Dust a baking sheet with cornmeal. Punch dough down and stir in sun-dried tomatoes, basil, and garlic using a wooden spoon or with your hands. Form dough into a loaf and place on the prepared baking sheet. Let dough rise in a warm area of the kitchen for 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until loaf is golden brown, about 30 minutes.
Mash banana in a 2-cup microwave-safe bowl. Stir in water, oats, cherries, pumpkin seeds, cinnamon, and salt. Microwave oat mixture until chewy and soft, about 1 minute 30 seconds. Let stand for 1 to 2 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease an 8x10-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Stir corn muffin mix, 1 egg, and milk together in a bowl; batter will be slightly lumpy. Pour into the prepared baking dish, creating a 1-inch layer. Bake in the preheated oven until corn bread has risen slightly, about 10 minutes. Make 4 indentations in the corn bread using the bottom of a small ladle; fill with ham. Crack 1 egg into each indentation. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese over eggs. Bake in the preheated oven until corn bread starts to brown, 10 to 15 minutes. Let stand for 5 minutes before serving.
Combine tea, berries, pineapple, banana, lemon juice, mint, and honey in a blender. Blend until smooth.
Bring a large pot of water to a boil; stir in vegetable bouillon until dissolved. Add asparagus; boil until crisp tender, 2 to 4 minutes. Drain, discarding broth. Run cold water over asparagus to halt the cooking process, about 30 seconds. Drain. Push onion through a food processor fitted with a shredder attachment. Repeat with bell pepper and carrot. Heat oil in a large nonstick skillet over medium heat. Add garlic; cook and stir until browned, about 1 minute. Stir in shredded onion, bell pepper, and carrot until coated with oil. Add seasoned salt. Cook, stirring occasionally, until mixture softens, 3 to 5 minutes. Stir in asparagus. Stir a dash of seasoned salt into beaten eggs. Pour into the skillet and stir to blend well. Cook until set, about 2 minutes. Reduce heat to medium-low and stir frequently until eggs are scrambled and fully cooked, 2 to 5 minutes. Reduce heat to low; add Parmesan cheese and stir until melted, about 1 minute.
Combine spinach, carrot, celery, tomato, apple, lime juice, ground flaxseed, ginger, seasoning blend, hot sauce, and Worcestershire sauce in a blender; add enough water to cover. Blend mixture until smooth.
Combine milk, yogurt, strawberries, banana, blueberries, green ice cube, whey, and honey in a blender, in the order listed. Blend until smooth.
Preheat a broiler for high heat. Line a baking sheet with parchment. Heat a saucepan over medium heat; add diced SPAM(R) Less Sodium and brown sugar, stirring to coat; cook until brown sugar is melted, about 2 minutes. Turn brown sugar-coated SPAM(R) Less Sodium onto prepared baking sheet. Broil under the preheated broiler until deep golden brown, about 15 minutes, stirring often to avoid scorching. Let candied SPAM(R) Less Sodium cool. Preheat and lightly grease waffle iron. Whisk Belgian waffle mix, eggs, vegetable oil, and vanilla extract together in a bowl until smooth; stir cooled candied SPAM(R) Less Sodium into batter. Pour about 2/3 cup batter onto the waffle iron. Cook waffles until golden-brown, about 3 minutes, or follow your waffle iron manufacturers cooking instructions. Repeat until all batter is gone. Top with maple syrup and enjoy!
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion until tender and browned, 15 to 20 minutes. Add ground beef and season with meat seasoning, garlic powder, herbes de Provence, salt, and pepper. Cook and stir until beef is browned and crumbly, about 5 minutes. Drain excess fat from skillet. Beat eggs together in a bowl. Whisk in milk, mayonnaise, and flour; sprinkle with salt. Stir in beef mixture and 1 cup of Cheddar cheese. Pour into the pie shell. Bake in preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center of quiche comes out clean, about 45 minutes. Sprinkle remaining cheese on top of the quiche. Allow to stand for 5 minutes before cutting.
Combine spinach, 1 cup orange juice, peaches, pineapple, 1 halved banana, and green tea powder in a blender; blend until combined. Pour smoothie into a glass. Rinse out the blender. Combine 1 cup orange juice, raspberries, strawberries, and 1 halved banana in the blender; blend until combined. Pour berry smoothie into a separate glass. Combine smoothies by pouring them at the same time from opposite sides of the serving glass.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease 2 loaf plans with coconut oil and sprinkle with gluten-free flour. Beat eggs in a large bowl; stir in coconut sugar, coconut oil, applesauce, cane sugar, vanilla extract, baking soda, baking powder, Ceylon cinnamon, and Himalayan salt. Mix in gluten-free flour and chickpea flour, 1 cup at a time; stir until mixed well. Fold in zucchini, pecans, and raspberries. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pans. Bake in preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 1 1/4 hours.
Combine coconut water, banana, blueberries, kale, spinach, dates, almond butter, hemp seed hearts, flax seeds, oats, and protein powder in a blender. Cover and puree until smooth. Top with graham cracker crumbs.
Place rhubarb in a saucepan with enough water to cover; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium, cover, and cook until tender, about 10 minutes. Remove from heat and stir 1/3 cup sugar into rhubarb mixture; set aside to cool to room temperature, about 30 minutes. Whisk flour, baking powder, 1 teaspoon sugar, and salt together in a large bowl. Whisk milk, melted butter, egg, and vanilla together in a cup; stir milk mixture into flour mixture to form a smooth batter. Stir 1 cup of the cooled rhubarb mixture into batter. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by 1/3 cupfuls onto griddle; cook until bubbles form and edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip pancakes; cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Serve pancakes with remaining rhubarb sauce.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Spray 10-cup Bundt or fluted tube pan with baking spray; set aside. Combine 2 envelopes hot cocoa mix and 1/4 cup sugar in large resealable food storage bag. Prepare glaze by combining remaining hot cocoa mix and sugar in small bowl; whisk in Parkay and milk until blended. Place half of biscuit pieces in cocoa mixture in bag; seal and shake to coat. Arrange coated biscuit pieces in bottom of pan; pour half of glaze over biscuits. Repeat with remaining biscuit pieces and glaze. Bake 30 minutes or until brown. Cool in pan 5 minutes. Invert onto serving tray. Pull apart and serve with Reddi-wip.
Combine oats, yogurt, and buckwheat flour in a bowl; pour in enough water to cover. Refrigerate oats mixture, 8 to 24 hours. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease an 8-inch square baking dish. Drain water from oats mixture and transfer oat mixture to a bowl. Add coconut, eggs, butter, maple syrup, cinnamon, baking powder, vanilla extract, and salt and mix well; fold in blueberries. Spread mixture into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until cooked through, 25 to 30 minutes.
Bring jackfruit, jaggery, and water to a boil in a small saucepan; cook until jaggery dissolves, about 10 minutes. Let cool, about 10 minutes. Transfer jackfruit mixture to a large bowl. Add milk, oats, egg, and baking powder; stir until batter is well-combined. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Drop 2 to 3 tablespoons of batter onto the skillet, using the back of the spoon to spread batter evenly into a round. Cover with a lid and cook until pancake is browned, 1 to 2 minutes per side. Transfer to a serving plate.
Combine milk, eggs, 3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons flour, sugar, salt, and nutmeg in a blender; blend until batter is smooth. Heat a seasoned griddle over medium-high heat. Ladle 1/4 to 1/2 cup of batter onto the griddle and spread thinly. Cook until top looks barely dry, 1 to 1 1/2 minutes. Slide a long, thin spatula under pancake to loosen edges; flip. Continue cooking until just browned on the second side, about 1 minute more. Roll up pancakes and serve a few at a time.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Mix chestnut flour, white rice flour, potato starch, and baking powder together in a large bowl. Combine milk, egg yolk, vegetable oil, and honey in another bowl. Sift in flour mixture, whisking constantly to prevent lumps in the batter. Beat egg white in a glass, metal, or ceramic bowl until peaks form. Fold gently into batter until just combined. Pour batter onto preheated waffle iron and cook until golden brown per manufacturer's instructions, 3 to 5 minutes.
Layer salad greens, red grapes, banana, pear, and walnuts in a high-powered blender; add enough water to cover. Blend mixture until smooth, adding more water to reach desired consistency.
Heat a saucepan over medium-low heat; add almond milk, ground flaxseed, and egg whites. Cook mixture, stirring constantly, until thickened, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to low and stir in applesauce, zucchini, and cinnamon. Cook and stir mixture until desired consistency is reached, 5 to 10 minutes more.
Gently place eggs in single layer in large saucepan. Add enough cold water to cover eggs by 1 inch. Cover. Bring just to boil on high heat. Remove from heat. Let stand 12 minutes. (Adjust time up or down by 3 minutes for each size larger or smaller). Pour off hot water and rapidly cool eggs by running them under cold water (or place in ice water) until completely cooled. Mix 1/2 cup boiling water, 1 teaspoon vinegar and 10 to 20 drops food color in a cup to achieve desired colors. Repeat for each color. Dip hard-cooked eggs in dye for about 5 minutes. Use a slotted spoon, wire egg holder or tongs to add and remove eggs from dye. Allow eggs to dry.
Whisk flour, milk, gingersnaps, peanut butter, butter, sugar, egg, baking powder, ginger, salt, and cinnamon together in a bowl until smooth batter forms. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Pour 1/2 cup batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Layer tofu, strawberries, and soy milk in a blender; blend. Add ice cubes, 1 cup at a time, while blender is running; blend until smooth.
Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir kale, mushrooms, salt, and pepper until until mushrooms are tender, 5 to 10 minutes. Whisk eggs, egg whites, and milk together in a bowl until frothy. Spray a non-stick skillet with cooking spray and place over medium heat; cook and stir egg mixture until cooked through, about 5 minutes. Transfer eggs to a plate and top with string cheese and kale mixture. Garnish eggs with Sriracha and parsley.
Place apples and almond milk in a blender; blend until smooth. Add bananas and blend. Add almond butter, coconut sugar, maca powder, spirulina powder, and chlorella powder and blend until smooth. Add oats and blend until smooth.
Blend bananas, egg whites, almond butter, coconut oil, and almond extract together in a food processor until smooth. Add pumpkin puree, coconut flour, pumpkin pie spice, cinnamon, baking powder, baking soda, nutmeg, ginger, and sea salt. Pulse until batter is just combined. Heat a skillet over medium-low heat; spray with cooking spray. Drop 2 large spoonfuls of batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 5 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 3 to 4 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Whisk brown rice flour, sorghum flour, millet flour, ground chia seeds, and baking powder together in a bowl. Whisk banana puree, walnuts, eggs, rice milk, applesauce, vegetable oil, salt, and cinnamon together in a separate large bowl. Whisk flour mixture into banana mixture until smooth, thick batter forms. Heat a griddle or large skillet over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle, spreading as necessary to form pancake shape. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8-inch pie pan with cooking spray. Whisk eggs and milk together in a bowl. Season with black pepper and dill. Place potato nuggets in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir until almost thawed, about 5 minutes. Add corned beef and onion; cook and stir until onions are translucent, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat and cool briefly, about 5 minutes. Stir potato nugget mixture into egg mixture. Fold in Cheddar cheese and Parmesan cheese. Pour into pie pan. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are firm and cheeses are melted, about 30 minutes.
Place boiling water in a bowl and add green tea; allow to steep for 5 minutes. Blend orange, pineapple, and kiwi fruit together in a blender. Remove tea bag from tea and add tea to orange mixture; blend. Add yogurt and blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bring water to a boil in a saucepan. Add oats, reduce heat to medium-low, and cook until tender, 10 to 15 minutes, adding more water if oats get too dry. Combine oatmeal, tomatoes, basil, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Beat eggs and cream together in a separate bowl. Fold egg mixture into oatmeal mixture; divide between 2 large ramekins or baking dishes. Top oatmeal mixture with feta cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until cooked through, about 30 minutes.
Blend oats in a blender until finely ground. Add strawberries, milk, cranberry-pomegranate juice, and flax seed; blend until smooth.
Beat eggs, milk, nutmeg, and cinnamon together with a fork in a bowl until somewhat smooth. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Dip a bread slice into egg mixture to evenly and generously coat each side and put into the hot skillet; cook until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Repeat with each bread slice. Cut each slice in half on a diagonal and arrange onto 2 plates. Arrange banana and strawberry slices on the plates around the French toast. Drizzle maple syrup over the French toast; dust with confectioners' sugar.
Process pineapple, apple, beet, and spinach through a juicer. Blend juice, berries, banana, avocado, and ice cubes in a blender until smooth.
Blend almond milk, banana, protein powder, and coconut oil together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil. Lay bacon strips in a single layer on prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until browned and crisp, 10 to 15 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Beat 3 eggs, brown sugar, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a large, shallow bowl. Dip each slice of bread into egg mixture to saturate completely. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Working in batches, cook bread slices in hot oil, turning once, until browned on each side, about 5 minutes. Transfer toast to a plate. Beat remaining eggs in a bowl. Cook and stir eggs in the same skillet over medium heat until eggs are scrambled and set, 3 to 4 minutes. Place 1 slice of toast on a plate and top with 1/2 of the bacon, 1/2 of the scrambled eggs, and 1 slice of toast. Repeat with remaining toast, bacon, and eggs. Top each sandwich with maple syrup.
Mix oat flour, barley flour, wheat germ, brown sugar, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl; make a well in the center. Stir milk, eggs, banana, honey, oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Pour milk mixture into the well in the flour mixture and gently stir just until batter is moistened and slightly lumpy. Add more milk to thin the batter, if desired. Heat a griddle or skillet over medium-low heat. Drop a small amount of water on surface. If water bounces, the griddle is ready. Lightly grease the griddle by running a paper towel dabbed with oil around the bottom of the griddle. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle forming 4- to 6-inch circles and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Mix oats, pecans, and almonds together in a bowl. Whisk oil, maple syrup, and water together in a measuring cup and pour over oat mixture; stir until evenly coated. Spread oat mixture onto 2 baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven for 12 minutes; stir and continue baking for 12 minutes more. Stir and bake until granola is golden brown, about 12 minutes more. Cool to room temperature. Mix cinnamon and cardamom together in a container with a lid; add dates, raisins, and cranberries. Cover container and shake until fruit is coated. Stir dried fruit into cooled granola.
Whisk flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Beat eggs in a separate bowl using an electric mixer for 1 minute; add beer, milk, oil, and vanilla extract and beat on low for 30 seconds. Pour egg mixture into flour mixture and mix just until combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Drop 1/2 cup batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Whisk together the eggs, butter, applesauce, and vanilla extract until well blended. In a separate bowl, mix together the remaining ingredients until thoroughly combined. Whisk together the dry and wet ingredients until evenly moistened. Heat a heavy frying pan over medium heat, or heat an electric griddle to 350 degrees F. Generously grease the frying pan or griddle. Drop batter by the tablespoonful onto the greased pan or griddle. Bake on one side until the edges begin to dry, a few bubbles form on the surface, and the pancakes hold together. Gently turn the pancakes and cook the other side until firm. Repeat with the remaining batter. Serve pancakes warm.
Prepare rice according to package directions. Let rice cool. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper; spray with non-stick spray. Mix cooled rice with 1/2 cup of Mexican cheese blend and 2 eggs. Stir until combined. Spread into a thin rectangle on parchment paper. Bake in preheated oven for 20 minutes. Beat remaining 6 eggs. Place non-stick skillet over medium heat and pour eggs into pan. Soft scramble eggs; remove from heat and season with salt and pepper. Spread refried beans over baked crust. Top with scrambled eggs and salsa. Sprinkle with green onions and shredded cheese. Fold the edges over and roll crust over filling. Bake until heated through, 15 to 20 minutes. Slice and serve with your favorite Mexican style toppings: sour cream, tomatoes, avocado, and/or cheese.
Blend pineapple, apples, mint leaves, and lime juice together in a blender until smooth. Add water, if desired, or strain to reach desired consistency.
Blend water, romaine lettuce, cucumber, avocado, celery, spinach, and lemon juice together in a blender on high until smooth, about 30 seconds. Add ice, apple, and banana to blender and blend until smooth, about 30 seconds.
Combine 2 cup water, almonds, and 1 pinch salt together in a bowl; let sit for 8 hours to overnight. Drain and rinse 2 times. Blend drained almonds and 2 cups water together in a blender until smooth, about 2 minutes. Transfer to a large bowl. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray an 11x15-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Mix flour, chocolate chips, olive oil, chia seeds, honey, powdered peanut butter, cinnamon, vanilla extract, and 2 teaspoons salt into almond mixture until dough is evenly combined. Transfer dough to the prepared baking dish, leveling dough with a fork or spatula. Bake in the preheated oven until cooked through and lightly browned, 30 to 40 minutes. Allow to cool for 10 minutes before cutting into bars.
Cook pork sirloin according to the directions on the package. For the hollandaise sauce: Whisk 3 egg yolks, 1 tablespoon milk and 1 tablespoon lemon juice in a pan over medium heat. Slowly add 8 tablespoons melted butter while stirring vigorously until combined. For the poached eggs: Fill a sauce pan with three inches of simmering water. Carefully crack eggs into water and cook for 3 minutes. Remove with a slotted spoon. An egg poacher can also be used in place of this method to simplify things. Toast English muffins and top each one with a slice of pork sirloin, an egg and hollandaise sauce.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Coat an 8-inch pie pan with cooking spray. Bring water and brown rice to a boil in a saucepan. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until rice is tender and liquid has been absorbed, 45 to 50 minutes. Stir peanut butter, applesauce, honey, and egg together in a bowl; add rice, garbanzo bean flour, oats, currants, coconut, sunflower seeds, chia seeds, baking powder, and ground cinnamon and stir until combined. Spread dough evenly in prepared pie pan. Bake in preheated oven until edges are golden brown, about 20 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Mix boiling water and flax seed meal together in a bowl; set aside to thicken. Combine oats, chia seeds, hemp hearts, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a large bowl; stir in agave nectar, coconut oil, and flax mixture until well mixed. Fold chocolate chips into mixture; press into a 9x11-inch baking pan. Bake in the preheated oven until cooked through, about 15 minutes. Cool to room temperature and slice into bars. Refrigerate before removing from pan.
Blend fruit, soy milk, goji berries, and honey together in a blender until smooth.
Layer bananas, peaches, coconut milk, moringa powder, and almond butter in a blender; add water. Blend mixture until very smooth, at least 1 minute.
Blend pineapple juice, coconut cream, and ice cubes together in a blender on high speed until smooth, 30 to 40 seconds.
Mix pizza sauce, pepperoni, tomato, onion, mushrooms, olives, oregano, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat. Pour eggs into the hot oil and cook until set, about 5 minutes. Pour pizza sauce mixture over eggs and cook until firm enough to fold 1 side of eggs over the filling creating an omelet, 5 to 10 minutes more.
Blend bananas and mango in a blender until smooth, about 2 minutes; add 3 ice cubes and blend until smooth, about 2 minutes. Fill a cocktail shaker with remaining 3 ice cubes; add blended banana mixture. Cover and shake until the outside of shaker has frosted. Strain into 2 chilled glasses and garnish with whipped cream.
Blend almond milk, bananas, dates, almond butter, cinnamon, flax seeds, and nutmeg together in a blender until smooth.
Combine bananas, sunflower seed butter, eggs, maple syrup, arrowroot flour, cinnamon, vanilla extract, and baking soda together in a bowl until batter is smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend ice, 1/2 cup strawberries, 1 banana, blackberries, and apple juice together in a blender until smooth, adding more ice depending on your desired consistency. Pour smoothie into a bowl. Top smoothie with remaining strawberries, remaining banana, blueberries, and granola. Drizzle honey over the top.
Blend strawberries, milk, peanut butter, oats, and honey together in a blender until smooth.
Stir milk and lemon juice together in a bowl; let sit until milk begins to slightly sour, about 10 minutes. Stir oats into milk mixture; cover and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Mix eggs, flour, baking powder, vanilla extract, cinnamon, cloves, and salt into oat mixture until batter is evenly combined. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend mango, banana, raspberries, almond milk, hemp milk, vanilla extract, chia seeds, hemp seeds, and maca powder together in a blender until smooth.
Blend almond milk, strawberries, protein powder, lemon juice, ground flax seed, and basil in a blender until smooth.
Stir yogurt, coconut oil, and agave nectar together in a bowl. Divide yogurt mixture evenly between 2 serving bowls. Layer oats, walnuts, mango, and apple over yogurt; top with chia seeds and hemp seeds.
Blend orange juice, banana, acai pulp, and sugar together in a blender until smooth.
Combine water, oats, and 1/8 teaspoon salt in a microwave-safe bowl. Cook on high in the microwave until the water is absorbed and oats are tender, 2 1/2 to 3 minutes. Cook onion, red bell pepper, olives, and black beans in a nonstick skillet over medium heat, stirring occasionally, until softened, about 5 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. Stir onion mixture, salsa, and Cheddar cheese into cooked oatmeal. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat; cook egg to desired doneness, 3 to 5 minutes. Top oatmeal with fried egg. Garnish with diced avocado and sour cream.
Mix spring onions, flour, sun-dried tomatoes, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a large bowl. Beat buttermilk, milk, melted butter, and egg together in a separate bowl until smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Pour buttermilk mixture over flour mixture; mix together with a wooden spoon or fork until batter is just blended. Pour 1/2 cup of the batter onto the hot griddle. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and top with some pepper Jack cheese and 1 slice of chicken. Cook until browned on the bottom, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip again and cook until chicken is warmed through, about 30 seconds. Repeat with remaining batter.
Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil. Prick the skin of the eggplants in several places and place on the baking sheet. Broil eggplants in the preheated oven, turning occasionally, until charred on all sides and completely tender when pierced with a fork, about 20 minutes. Remove from oven and allow to cool until easy to handle, about 15 minutes. Remove eggplants' stems and peel; dice flesh. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium-low heat. Add onion and garlic; cook and stir until onion is translucent, about 5 minutes. Stir in tomatoes and cook until soft, about 5 minutes. Stir in diced eggplant, salt, and pepper. Pour eggs over vegetables and mix until scrambled and no longer runny, about 5 minutes.
Blend coconut water, peaches, kiwis, banana, strawberries, honey, ground ginger, and wheat germ together in a blender on medium speed until smooth, 30 seconds to 1 minute.
Combine pancake mix and water in a large bowl; mix well. Stir in diced apples. Place batter in the refrigerator to rest, about 15 minutes. Heat sugar in a large saucepan over medium heat, stirring constantly, until it melts into a thick amber-colored liquid, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to low. Add apple cider slowly to the saucepan, stirring constantly, until mixture is the consistency of syrup, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat and cover. Heat a lightly greased skillet over medium-high heat. Drop a scant 1/4 cup of batter into the skillet and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 1 to 2 minutes. Flip and cook until golden brown on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Serve with cider syrup.
Place almond milk, hemp seeds, chia seeds, almond butter, cocoa powder, instant coffee, and agave nectar in a blender; blend until smooth. Pour into a small saucepan and heat, stirring frequently, over medium-low heat until slightly thickened, about 5 minutes. Pour into a mug.
Bring water to a boil in a large pot. Add oats, flaxseed meal, and chia seeds, whisking well after each addition to prevent clumps. Add goji berries, raisins, cranberries, brown sugar, pumpkin seeds, and cinnamon. Reduce heat and simmer, stirring occasionally, until oatmeal reaches desired consistency, 40 to 45 minutes.
Whisk eggs in a bowl; add eggnog while whisking. Stir in salt. Melt butter in a small skillet over low heat. Pour in egg mixture, swirling pan to spread in an even layer. Cook until lightly browned, about 2 minutes on each side; season with salt and pepper.
Place cold water, banana, and spinach leaves in a blender; blend to combine, about 5 seconds. Add spirulina powder and blend until smooth, 1 minute more.
Place hollandaise ingredients (avocado, lime juice, 3 tablespoons olive oil, water) in your blender and turn on until smooth. Scrape the sides as needed. Add salt to taste. The sauce should be thick and creamy, but if needed add a bit more lime juice, oil, and/or water to get it moving more. Refrigerate until ready to use. Preheat your grill to 375 degrees F. Slice the potatoes lengthwise into 1/3-inch-thick slabs. Drizzle with 2 teaspoons olive oil and rub over both sides. Generously top with salt and pepper. Place on the grill for about 12-15 minutes. Flip and continue to grill until fork tender, about 15 minutes. If your potatoes finish before you're done cooking the vegetables, turn the heat off on the grill with the lid shut and leave them there to stay warm until you're ready. My egg poaching method: While the potatoes grill, place about 4 inches of water in a large pot. Heat over high with the lid on until the water simmers. Uncover and reduce heat so the water is just barely simmering a few small bubbles. Maintain this heat throughout the poaching process. Place 2 paper towels on a large plate. Crack 1 egg in a small bowl. Gently swirl your water with a spatula in one direction and slowly pour the egg into the center of the pot. Gently swirl the water a few times around the egg then let it be for 4 minutes. Carefully remove with a slotted spoon and drain on the paper towels; repeat for each egg, using the same water. Heat a pan over medium with a drizzle of oil. Place the onion in the pan with a good pinch of salt and let it cook, stirring every minute or so, for about 8 minutes. Add the garlic, cumin, and chili powder and cook for another minute. Return the pot of water to just below a simmer. Add the bell pepper to the pan and cook for another 3-4 minutes, stirring once in a while, until just starting to soften. Add the corn and black beans and cook until hot. Stir in the adobo sauce and turn to low. Place all eggs gently back in the warm water and let them reheat for no longer than 1 minute. Place potato slabs on 2 plates with the veggie mixture over top. Remove eggs with a slotted spoon or place on the paper towel to drain the water and then place them on top of the veggie mixture (2 for each serving). Top with the avocado hollandaise, salt, pepper, and hot sauce if desired. Serve immediately.
Preheat a wok or skillet on high heat for 1 minute. Coat wok thoroughly with 2 tablespoons peanut oil; reduce heat to medium. Cook and stir onion until beginning to soften, about 3 minutes. Crack eggs directly into the wok. Stir quickly to scramble until eggs begin to set but are still fluid, about 1 1/2 minutes. Stir ham into the wok and cook just until warmed through, about 1 minute. Stir butter and remaining 1 tablespoon of peanut oil into the wok; let warm for 10 seconds. Add rice and stir constantly for 3 to 4 minutes, adding more oil if rice begins to stick. Season fried rice with salt and pepper; top with Cheddar cheese.
Whisk flour, baking powder, salt, nutmeg, and cinnamon together in a large bowl. Whisk eggnog, eggs, oil, and rum extract together in a small bowl. Add to flour mixture and mix briefly to combine. Batter should be slightly lumpy. Grease a griddle lightly with cooking spray and heat over medium-high heat. Pour 1/4 cup batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend coconut water, spinach, banana, strawberries, and dates together in a blender.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a tart pan. Combine eggs, creme fraiche, parsley, chives, salt, and pepper in a bowl and mix until well combined. Line the greased tart pan with puff pastry. Spread smoked salmon over the bottom, followed by Gruyere cheese. Pour egg mixture on top. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs have set and puff pastry has risen and browned, about 45 minutes.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels and crumble. Beat eggs in a bowl and stir in milk. Season with salt and pepper. Add bacon, hash browns, and 1/2 of the Cheddar cheese. Butter a casserole dish and press mixture into the dish. Top with the remaining cheese. Cover casserole and refrigerate to let flavors mingle, 8 hours to overnight. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Uncover the casserole. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set, 1 1/2 to 2 hours.
Cut chicken thighs into 1-inch pieces. Chop pancetta finely using a meat cleaver until paste-like in texture. Mix chicken and pancetta together. Sprinkle salt, pepper, thyme, fennel, coriander, cayenne, nutmeg, and sage. Mix until combined and place mixture on a plate; cover with plastic wrap and freeze for 15 to 20 minutes before grinding. Peel and quarter apples. Grate apples into a bowl. Place grated apples in a paper towel and squeeze all the water out. Add apples to the partially frozen chicken sausage meat. Place 1/2 of the chicken mixture in a food processor. Pulse on and off until mixture is slightly finer than coarse sausage. Repeat with the remaining chicken. Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate to let the flavors develop, 4 hours to overnight. Use a large ice cream scoop to portion out the meat. Flatten scoops with dampened hands to make patties about the same size as your biscuits. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook patties until bottom is browned and leaves a deep brown fond in the skillet, 3 to 5 minutes. Reduce heat to medium and flip patties over. Add butter and sage leaves. Cook until patties are firm to the touch, removing leaves once they stop bubbling, about 5 minutes more. Remove patties. Whisk flour into the pan; cook and stir until starting to thicken, about 1 minute. Pour in broth and bring to a boil, whisking the browned bits of food off the bottom of the skillet. Add maple syrup and creme fraiche; season with salt and pepper. Cook until gravy is spoonable and reaches desired thickness, 2 to 3 minutes more. Add more broth if gravy is too thick. Remove from heat. Place biscuit halves on individual plates. Top each with a chicken sausage patty; spoon gravy on top. Garnish each with a fried sage leaf.
Heat olive oil in a heavy-bottomed frying pan. Saute onion and bell peppers in the hot oil for 2 to 3 minutes. Add chile pepper and garlic; cook and stir the peppers start to caramelize, 2 to 3 minutes. Add tomatoes and sugar. Cook over medium heat for 3 to 4 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. Make indentations in the sauce using a wooden spoon. Crack eggs into indentations in the sauce. Cover and cook until whites are firm and yolks reach desired doneness, 5 to 8 minutes. Uncover and garnish with green onions.
Preheat the oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Combine almonds, pecans, walnuts, sunflower seeds, and sesame seeds in a bowl. Heat honey and butter in a saucepan over low heat until butter is melted. Add vanilla extract, cinnamon, salt, cloves, and allspice. Stir together and remove from heat. Pour honey mixture over the nut and seed mixture; mix well. Spread evenly over the prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven, stirring every 15 minutes, until golden brown, about 40 minutes. Let cool until granola crumbles easily. Add raisins after granola has cooled.
Cut an X into one side of each tomato. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add tomatoes and cook for 1 minute. Drain in a colander, and carefully peel and slice tomatoes. Melt butter in a large skillet over medium heat and cook onions until soft and translucent, about 5 minutes. Add tomato slices and season with salt. Cook until tomatoes are soft and most of the liquid has evaporated, about 10 minutes. Beat eggs and milk in a small bowl. Season with salt and stir in parsley. Pour egg mixture on top of tomatoes in the skillet. Cook over low heat until eggs have set, 5 to 10 minutes. Serve immediately.
Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat and cook mushrooms until softened, about 3 minutes. Add lemon juice and salt. Pour in cream, cover, and cook over low heat until thickened, about 5 minutes. Beat eggs, milk, parsley, and salt in a cup. Pour over mushrooms in the skillet and allow to set for 2 minutes. Stir until eggs are well scrambled and have the desired consistency, 3 to 5 minutes more. Serve garnished with additional parsley.
Mix milk and yeast in a small bowl with a fork until frothy, about 5 minutes. Add egg, butter, white sugar, brown sugar, vanilla extract, and salt. Beat for 1 to 2 minutes. Add 1 cup flour. Beat for about 5 minutes. Add remaining 2 cups flour; mix until dough comes together. Turn dough out onto a lightly floured work surface. Knead until dough is smooth and feels rubbery, about 10 minutes. Add additional flour if needed. Add chocolate chips and cherries; knead just until incorporated. Cover dough and let rise in a warm, humid area until doubled, about 1 hour. Punch down dough gently. Let rest for 10 minutes. Divide dough in half; shape into loaves. Transfer loaves to a greased baking sheet and let rise again, about 1 hour more. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until browned, 20 to 30 minutes.
Combine cranberries, water, sugar, and orange juice in a saucepan. Cook over medium heat until cranberries soften and turn jammy, 20 to 25 minutes. Preheat the oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Whisk eggs, sugar, orange juice, half-and-half, cinnamon, and vanilla extract together in a shallow dish. Dip slices of French bread in the egg mixture until well coated on both sides. Transfer to the griddle and cook until egg coating is set, 3 to 4 minutes per side. Arrange 2 slices of French toast on each plate and spoon sauce on top.
Fill the bottom of a double boiler partway with water. Make sure the water does not touch the top pan. Bring to a gentle simmer. Whisk egg yolks, lemon juice, mustard, sugar, Worcestershire sauce, salt, and pepper together in the top of the double boiler. Add melted butter 1 or 2 tablespoons at a time, whisking constantly until fully combined. Remove from heat and cover the Hollandaise. Fill a large saucepan with 3 inches of water and bring to a gentle simmer. Add vinegar. Crack an egg into a small bowl then gently slip egg into the simmering water, holding the bowl just above the surface of water. Repeat with remaining eggs. Cook eggs until the whites are firm and the yolks have thickened but still soft in the centers, 2 1/2 to 3 minutes. Remove the eggs from the water with a slotted spoon, dab on a kitchen towel to remove excess water, and place onto a warm plate. Toast and butter the English muffins. Divide between two plates and top with smoked salmon. Place the poached eggs on top and cover with the Hollandaise sauce.
Combine rolled oats, blueberries, Greek yogurt, soy milk, cinnamon, and sugar in a lidded jar. Cover, shake to mix, and refrigerate 8 hours to overnight.
Mix flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl. Add eggnog, eggs, and butter; mix well. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Pour 1/4 of the batter into the preheated iron and cook until waffle is crisp and golden, about 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Heat olive oil in an oven-safe skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir leeks until softened and separated, 3 to 5 minutes. Add radish tops and cook until wilted, 3 to 5 minutes more. Set an oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Whisk eggs, grated Parmesan cheese, and heavy cream together in a bowl. Pour egg mixture into the skillet with the leek mixture and reduce heat to medium-low. Cover and allow to cook until edges are firm and have begun to pull away from the sides of the skillet, 5 to 10 minutes. Place skillet under the broiler and cook until cheese is browned on top, 3 to 5 minutes. Remove skillet from the broiler. Allow to rest for 10 minutes before serving. Top with shredded radishes. Serve warm or cold.
Mix heavy cream, buttermilk, and 2 tablespoons sugar together in a bowl. Let stand at room temperature until slightly thickened, 6 to 8 hours. Cover and refrigerate for at least 24 hours before using. Sift flour, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk ricotta cheese, egg yolks, milk, sugar, and lemon zest together in a separate bowl. Whisk in flour mixture until batter is smooth. Beat egg whites in a glass, metal, or ceramic bowl until stiff peaks form. Fold very gently into the batter. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Drop 1/2 cup batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Beat sweetened creme fraiche until stiff peaks form. Serve with pancakes.
Turn on a multi-functional pressure cooker (such as Instant Pot(R)) and select Saute function. Heat olive oil and cook onion, red bell pepper, garlic, chili powder, paprika, and cumin until soft, about 3 minutes. Add kale and cook until soft, about 2 minutes. Stir in marinara sauce and season with salt and pepper; turn off the pot and let cool for 5 minutes. Crack eggs carefully in the pot, evenly spaced. Close and lock the lid. Select low pressure according to manufacturer's instructions; set timer for 1 minute. Once it beeps, release pressure carefully using the quick-release method according to manufacturer's instructions, about 2 minutes. Unlock and remove the lid. Sprinkle with parsley.
Puree all ingredients in a blender until smooth.
In medium bowl, beat milk, egg product, Truvia(R)  natural sweetener, salt and vanilla. Pour into shallow dish; set aside. Heat nonstick griddle or nonstick skillet over medium heat or to 350 degrees F. (To test griddle, sprinkle with a few drops of water. If bubble jump around, heat is just right.). Grease griddle with butter as needed. Dip bread into egg mixture; coating each side of bread. Place on griddle. Cook 3 to 4 minutes on each side or until golden brown. Serve each slice with 14 cup berries and 1 tablespoon whipped topping. Drizzle with syrup.
In bowl, mix buckwheat flour, rice flour, golden flax meal, cocoa, and brown sugar. Add vanilla coconut milk and oil. Whisk until smooth. Let rest 10 minutes. Meanwhile, whisk culinary coconut milk with vanilla cultured coconut milk. Set aside. Heat small cast-iron pan over medium heat. Grease lightly with oil. Add 1/4 cup batter to hot pan, twirling to spread batter out in a thin layer. Cook for about 2 minutes per side, using spatula to loosen edges. Transfer to plate and repeat with remaining batter. Spoon a layer of coconut cream inside crepes and roll up. Garnish and fill crepes with your choice of toppings and fillings. Some suggestions include fresh berries, toasted nuts, seeds, vegan chocolate, coconut chips, etc.
Place apples, celery, cucumber, romaine lettuce leaves, kale, parsley, lemon juice, and water in a blender or juicer; process until desired consistency is reached, adding more water as needed.
Blend almond milk, apple, banana, pumpkin puree, dates, ice, chia seeds, oats, hemp seeds, pumpkin pie spice, molasses, honey, and vanilla extract in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Cook bacon in large non-stick skillet until crisp. Remove bacon from skillet and all but 1 tablespoon (15 mL) drippings and any extra brown bits. Coarsely chop bacon. Meanwhile, cut potatoes in half lengthwise. Scoop out flesh, leaving 1/4-inch (6 mm) thick walls. Coarsely chop flesh. Arrange potato shells cut side up on baking sheet and brush inside with olive oil. Bake until lightly browned, about 10-12 minutes. In same skillet, cook chopped potato, salt and 1/4 teaspoon (1 mL) pepper in bacon drippings, turning often, until browned. Place in bowl. In small bowl, beat eggs with remaining pepper. Heat butter in medium skillet. Cook eggs, stirring, until set but still soft, about 2 minutes. Add to browned potatoes and toss with chopped bacon, half of cheese and green onions. Fill potato shells with egg mixture and sprinkle with remaining cheese. Bake until cheese melts, about 2 minutes. Serve warm.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan and dust with 1 tablespoon cocoa powder. Whisk sugar and oil together in a large bowl until smooth. Beat eggs, 1 at a time, into sugar-oil mixture, beating thoroughly before adding the next egg. Beat mashed sweet potato and vanilla extract into sugar-egg mixture until smooth. Sift flour, 1/2 cup cocoa powder, baking soda, cinnamon, and salt together in a separate bowl. Sprinkle oats over flour mixture. Stir flour mixture, 2 to 3 tablespoons at a time, into sweet potato mixture until batter is just mixed; fold in apples and walnuts. Spread batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven for 70 minutes. Increase temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) and bake until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out nearly clean, 20 to 30 minutes more.
Combine buttermilk, flour, oats, amaranth, egg, flax seeds, chia seeds, olive oil, brown sugar, baking powder, vanilla extract, baking soda, and salt in a food processor or blender; blend until smooth. Heat vegetable oil on a griddle or skillet over high heat. Pour batter, about 1/4 cup per pancake, onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Grease and flour two 8x4-inch loaf pans. Mix flour, wheat bran, cinnamon, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in the bowl of a stand mixer using the whisk attachment. Beat brown sugar, applesauce, eggs, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl; fold in zucchini. Pour zucchini mixture into flour mixture and mix well; pour into prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of a loaf comes out clean, about 50 minutes. Cool bread in pans on a wire rack for 20 minutes; remove bread from pans and completely cool.
Melt coconut oil in a small skillet over medium heat. Beat egg and egg white together in a small bowl. Cook and stir egg mixture in hot coconut oil until just starting to set, about 30 seconds. Stir sun-dried tomatoes, yellow onion, green onion, and Cheddar cheese into egg mixture; cook and stir until eggs are almost completely set; 2 to 4 minutes. Add spinach to eggs; cook and stir until spinach wilts. Transfer eggs to a plate and top with avocado.
Blend milk, banana, mango, currants, and tofu together in a blender until smooth.
Stir rolled oats, chickpea flour, oat bran, 1 tablespoon cinnamon, and baking powder together in a large bowl. Stream water into the flour mixture while stirring into a batter, avoiding it becoming too watery. Stir apple, orange juice, and vanilla extract into batter. Lightly grease a griddle and heat it until drops of water sprinkled on it evaporate noisily. Ladle batter onto griddle in about 1/2 cup portions, dust with cinnamon, and cook until bubbles begin to form on top, 3 to 5 minutes; flip and continue cooking until bottom side is a golden brown color, 2 to 3 minutes more.
Combine ice cubes, banana, rice milk, blueberries, peanut butter, and maple syrup in a blender; blend on low speed. Increase speed to medium-high and blend until smooth.
Stir 1/4 milk and sage leaves together in a microwave-safe bowl. Microwave for 1 minute; cool. Strain and discard leaves and reserve 'scented' milk. Whisk remaining milk, egg, brown sugar, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Add sage-scented milk to egg mixture and whisk. Soak challah bread slices in the egg mixture until saturated, about 2 minutes per side. Heat vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook soaked bread slices in hot oil until golden and crispy, 2 to 3 minutes per side.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Mix eggs, peanut butter, agave nectar, vanilla extract, salt, and stevia together in a bowl. Sift coconut flour and baking powder together in a bowl; stir into egg mixture until batter is smooth. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of the bread comes out clean, about 1 hour.
Mix flour, cottage cheese, orange juice, eggs, chia seeds, olive oil, psyllium husk, and water together in a bowl until batter is smooth. Heat butter in a griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
In a large skillet, over medium heat, cook hash brown potatoes according to package directions. Add fresh spinach to skillet towards the end of cooking time and toss lightly. Cook until spinach is slightly wilted and soft. In a non-stick skillet, over medium heat, scramble egg whites, seasoning with salt and pepper to taste. To serve, lay tortillas on a work surface. Fill each with approximately 2 oz. of mozzarella, then spoon in egg whites and potato/spinach mixture, dividing evenly between each tortilla. Roll burrito style, heat in microwave for 30 seconds each, or for a crispier outside, bake in 350 degrees F oven for 5 minutes and serve.
Blend eggs, wheat berries, almond milk, oats, coconut oil, and vanilla extract together in a blender until smooth, 45 to 50 seconds. Add sugar, cinnamon, baking soda, cloves, mace, and salt; pulse blender until the dry ingredients are incorporated into the batter. Pour batter into a large bowl and fold cottage cheese into the mixture. Heat a large skillet over medium heat and coat with cooking spray. Pour about 1/4 cup batter onto the skillet and cook until bubbles appear on the surface, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip with a spatula and cook until browned on the other side, about 2 minutes more.
Pour enough spring water over Brazil nuts in a bowl to cover by several inches; soak in refrigerator 8 hours to overnight. Drain Brazil nuts and put them into a blender; add banana, kefir, amaranth, cocoa powder, vanilla extract, and honey. Blend mixture until smooth, adding spring water as needed to reach desired consistency.
Pour 2 fluid ounces water and drop 3 ice cubes into a blender; add ginger and cinnamon. Layer celery, apple, cucumber, kale, spinach, mixed greens, and mint leaves, respectively, in blender. Blend mixture until smooth. Add more water and ice to reach desired consistency.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Generously grease a jelly roll pan or rimmed baking sheet with shortening. Mix baking mix, cinnamon, and salt together in a bowl; add rice milk, eggs, and date sugar and mix until dough is thoroughly mixed. Fold raisins into batter; spread evenly into the prepared baking sheet. Baking in the preheated oven until bread easily bounces back when touched, about 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Grease four 7x3-inch loaf pans. Mix 1/4 cup sucralose sugar substitute and 1 teaspoon cinnamon together in a bowl. Dust the prepared loaf pans with sugar-cinnamon mixture. Beat margarine and 1 1/2 cups sucralose blend for baking together in a bowl using an electric mixer until smooth and creamy. Mix bananas, egg substitute, sour cream, vanilla extract, and 2 teaspoons cinnamon into creamed margarine mixture until smooth. Stir flour, protein powder, baking soda, and salt substitute into banana mixture until batter is just mixed; fold in walnuts. Pour batter into the prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of a loaf comes out clean, about 1 hour.
In a frying pan, slightly brown seasoned potatoes and Veggie Breakfast Patties in 1/2 tablespoon oil over medium-high heat. Add butter (if using) and 1/2 tablespoon oil to pan along with onions and mushrooms, and cook for 3-4 minutes or until onions are cooked and all liquid is evaporated. Add peppers, season vegetables in pan with salt and pepper and cook for 1 minute. Add potatoes, diced patties, stir in egg whites or eggs, turn heat to medium-low, cover pan and cook until eggs are cooked through. Do not stir.
Beat egg whites or eggs, yogurt, salt and pepper with fork in medium bowl for 1 minute. In skillet, saute Yves Breakfast Links or Yves Veggie Bacon in oil over medium heat for 1 minute. Add tomato, green onion and saute for 30 seconds. Stir in cilantro, cumin and oregano. Add egg mixture and stir quickly until scrambled. Serve with whole wheat toast.
Place water, spinach, apple, orange, cucumber, cranberries, and ginger in a blender. Blend on low until just combined; increase speed to high and blend until smooth and liquefied, about 1 minute.
Heat broiler. Brush both sides of bread with oil and place on a large baking sheet. Toast bread under broiler on both sides. Melt butter in medium pan over medium heat. Add capers to beaten eggs. Add eggs to pan and scramble to desired doneness. Divide eggs, bacon, sausage and tomatoes between bread slices. Top with cheese, if desired. Serve immediately.
Place a steamer insert into a saucepan and fill with water to just below the bottom of the steamer. Bring water to a boil. Add cauliflower, cover, and steam until tender, about 10 minutes. Transfer cauliflower to a blender and blend until smooth. Measure 1 cup pureed cauliflower and store any remaining in a container in the refrigerator for  another use. Stir 1 cup cauliflower puree and cottage cheese together in a large bowl until smooth. Mix flour, brown sugar, baking powder, nutmeg, and cinnamon into cauliflower mixture until batter is just mixed and thickened. Add eggs to batter until thoroughly mixed. Stir milk into batter, adding 1 tablespoon more at a time if needed, until batter is smooth. Heat butter in a large frying pan over medium heat; drop heaping tablespoons batter into the melted butter. Cook until batter begins to bubble, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip pancakes and cook other side until browned, 3 to 4 more minutes. The inside of these pancakes will be softer than traditional pancakes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Blend cabbage, grapes, apple, carrot, water, ice cubes, and ginger together in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 9x5-inch loaf pan with cooking spray. Beat 1 cup flour, sweet potatoes, brown sugar, milk, vegetable oil, eggs, baking powder, cinnamon, orange zest, salt, and baking soda together in a bowl using an electric mixer until batter is smooth, about 2 minutes. Stir remaining 1 cup flour into batter; fold in pineapple. Pour batter into prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted in the center of the bread comes out clean, 55 to 60 minutes.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Spray 2 baking sheets with cooking spray or line with non-stick aluminum foil. Whisk maple syrup, vanilla extract, cinnamon, rose water, and salt together in a bowl. Mix oats, rice cereal, coconut, cashews, raisins, dried blueberries, pecans, almonds, dried cranberries, and brown sugar together in a separate bowl. Pour maple syrup mixture over oat mixture and stir until evenly coated. Spread oat mixture onto the prepared baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven for 20 minutes; stir and continue baking until slightly crisp and lightly browned, 15 to 25 more minutes. Cool on baking sheets before serving, about 1 hour. Store in air-tight containers.
Blend kale, spinach, parsley, pineapple juice, and pineapple in a blender until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Whisk evaporated milk, eggs, and baking powder together in a bowl. Spread half the chili on the bottom of a casserole dish. Spread pepperjack cheese and mozzarella cheese over the chili. Spread remaining half the chili on top of the cheese. Spread Cheddar cheese over chili. Pour egg mixture over Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set and cheese is melted and bubbling, 55 to 57 minutes.
Preheat oven to 250 degrees F (120 degrees C). Grease and flour 2 9x5-inch loaf pans. Stir cake mix and water together in a large bowl; add vegetable oil, pecans, pudding mix, eggs, poppy seeds, vanilla extract. Stir until just combined. Pour batter into the prepared pans. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes. Increase temperature to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C) and bake until a toothpick inserted in the center of a loaf comes out clean, about 45 more minutes.
Blend pineapple, coconut water, ice cubes, dandelion greens, coconut, cashews, and dates in a blender until smooth and creamy.
Heat a large skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir eggs until no longer moist, about 3 minutes. Pour chili into the skillet; stir. Continue cooking until the chili is hot, about 5 minutes.
Spray a deep 9x13-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Lay bread pieces into bottom of the prepared baking dish. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes; drain and discard grease. Spread sausage over bread. Whisk eggs, cream of celery soup, and milk together in a bowl until mixture is smooth. Spread 1 package of Cheddar cheese over sausage; pour egg mixture over the cheese. Spread remaining package of Cheddar cheese over the top of the casserole. Cover with foil and refrigerate overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake casserole in the preheated oven until set, about 45 minutes; remove foil covering and continue baking until cheese topping is browned, about 15 more minutes. Let casserole stand 10 minutes before serving.
Fill a small pitcher with ice. Pour orange juice, sparkling wine, and peach schnapps over ice; stir well.
Preheat oven to 250 degrees F (120 degrees C). Place oats, almonds, sunflower seeds, coconut flakes, cocoa powder, salt, cardamom, and cinnamon in a large bowl. Mix until thoroughly combined. Combine almond milk, brown rice syrup, molasses, coconut oil, and vanilla extract in a large measuring cup. Stir into the oats mixture with a large spoon until evenly coated. Spread onto 2 large baking sheets. Bake on the middle rack of the preheated oven, stirring every 30 minutes, until dry and crunchy, about 2 hours. Turn off heat; leave granola in the oven until cool enough to handle, 25 to 30 minutes.
Place half the blackberries in a bowl; mash into a juicy pulp. Transfer to a small saucepan with the remaining blackberries. Cook over low heat until warm, 3 to 5 minutes. Add honey to the compote. Beat egg yolk, egg whites, nutmeg, cinnamon, and ginger together in a bowl. Soak each slice of bread in the mixture for 10 to 15 seconds per side. Heat a skillet over medium heat. Cook the soaked bread slices until golden brown, about 3 minutes per side. Ladle the warm berry compote on top.
Beat eggs in a bowl with a wire whisk. Add salt, cinnamon, curry powder, onion powder, garlic powder, and black pepper. Mix in milk and oil. Rinse matzo under running water until softened, breaking into pieces less than 1 1/2 inches in diameter. Drain and add to the egg mixture; stir carefully to coat. Heat a skillet over medium heat. Add the matzo-egg mixture; cook, stirring constantly, until eggs are firm and slightly browned, 3 to 5 minutes.
Whisk eggs together in a bowl. Add half-and-half, matzo pieces, and salt. Let soak for 5 minutes. Heat a small nonstick skillet over medium heat. Pour in egg mixture; cook until eggs are firm on the bottom, 2 to 3 minutes. Stir with a spatula until scrambled and firm, 1 to 2 minutes.
Place the dried black mushrooms and soybeans into 2 separate large containers and cover each with several inches of cool water; let stand 8 hours to overnight. Rinse and drain the mushrooms and soy beans. Trim tough stems from mushrooms; cut each mushroom into halves. Bring a pot of water to a boil. With a sharp knife, cut an X shape into the peel of each chestnut. Add chestnuts to the boiling water; cook until hot, 3 to 4 minutes. Drain and plunge immediately into a large bowl of ice water to stop from cooking further. Drain and set aside. When cool enough to handle, peel the chestnuts from the shells and discard the skins and peels. Set the peeled chestnuts aside. Bring 16 cups water and long-grain rice to a boil in a large pot. Reduce heat to medium-low and cook at a simmer for 30 minutes. Heat oil in a wok or large skillet over medium-high heat to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Cook and stir bok choy in hot oil quickly, about 1 minute; add to the rice. Stir peeled chestnuts, black mushrooms, soy beans, water chestnuts, red dates, and salt into the rice. Bring the mixture to a boil, reduce heat to medium-low, and simmer 30 minutes. Stir chicken into the rice mixture, bring again to a boil, reduce heat to medium-low, and simmer until chicken is no longer pink in the middle, about 10 minutes.
Bring chicken broth and butter to a boil in a large saucepan; reduce heat to low and slowly whisk in grits. Simmer grits until tender and chicken broth is absorbed, about 15 minutes. Remove from heat, stir Cheddar and Parmesan cheeses into grits until smooth, and cover. Keep grits warm. Cook and stir diced salt pork in a large dry skillet over medium-low heat until pork has rendered most of its fat, about 10 minutes; raise heat to medium-high and cook until the pork pieces are browned, stirring often, about 5 more minutes. Remove pork pieces with a slotted spoon and retain drippings in skillet. Spread pine nuts into skillet with salt pork drippings over medium heat and stir until fragrant and lightly browned, 3 to 5 minutes. Scoop pine nuts out of skillet with slotted spoon, retaining drippings in skillet, and stir nuts into grits. Place shrimp and garlic into the hot skillet; cook until shrimp are just opaque and bright pink, 1 to 2 minutes. Remove shrimp from skillet and leave most of the garlic in the pan. Stir tomatoes, red curry paste, dry mustard, dry horseradish, oregano, thyme, basil, and kosher salt into skillet, bring to a boil, and cook over medium-high heat until liquid is reduced by half, about 10 minutes. Stir shrimp back into skillet and toss with sauce. Serve grits topped with shrimp and sauce. If desired, top with browned salt pork pieces.
Combine basmati rice, urad dal, parboiled rice, and fenugreek seeds in a bowl. Cover with water; soak for 2 to 3 hours. Drain the rice mixture; transfer to a blender. Add water, 1/4 cup at a time, and blend until a smooth paste forms. Add salt. Transfer batter to a covered container; set aside to ferment, at least 12 hours. Thin the batter, if necessary, by stirring in 1 tablespoon water at a time. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Ladle 1/4 cup batter into the skillet, spreading it quickly into a circular shape. Fry until edges start to look dry and curl from the pan, 1 to 2 minutes. Flip dosa; cook until underside is just golden and still soft, about 30 seconds.
Dissolve yeast and sugar in 2 tablespoons of the lukewarm milk in a bowl. Let stand until yeast softens and begins to form a creamy foam, about 5 minutes. Sift flour into large bowl, add yeast mixture, melted butter, remaining milk, egg, and salt. Stir well to combine until dough has pulled together. Turn dough out onto a lightly floured surface and knead until smooth and elastic, about 8 minutes. Place dough in a large bowl. Cover with a towel and let rise in a warm place until doubled in volume, about 1 to 1 1/2 hours. Punch dough down, cover with a towel, and let rise in a warm place for 1 hour. Place bacon pieces in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 5 minutes. Add onion and saute on low heat until soft, about 15 minutes. Remove from pan and cool slightly. Mix bacon-onion mixture with sour cream and season with a little salt and pepper (be careful not to over-salt, as bacon is already salty). Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a 10- or 12-inch springform pan. Roll dough on lightly floured surface to fit springform pan and cover pan. Fill with bacon-onion mixture. Bake in preheated oven until dough is set and filling is slightly browned, about 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Arrange bread slices on a baking sheet. Drizzle 2 tablespoons olive oil on top; season with salt and pepper. Bake in the preheated oven until crisp, about 15 minutes. Remove from oven. Keep oven on. Heat remaining 1 tablespoon olive oil in an oven-safe skillet over medium heat. Cook and stir garlic until fragrant, 3 to 4 minutes. Stir in tomatoes; season with salt and pepper. Simmer, stirring frequently, until breaking down into a sauce, about 10 minutes. Make 6 wells in the tomatoes using a wooden spoon. Crack 1 egg into each well. Sprinkle Parmesan cheese and basil leaves on top. Transfer skillet to the preheated oven; bake until whites are set and yolks are still runny, about 6 minutes. Scoop 1 egg over each slice of bread using a large spoon. Spoon remaining tomatoes over the top.
Whisk eggs in a bowl until light and fluffy. Add ricotta cheese; whisk until smooth. Mix in sugar and enough matzo meal to bind batter into a thick consistency. Heat oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Plop batter by heaping tablespoons into the skillet. Cook until browned, about 1 minute; flip and flatten pancake. Cook until other side is browned, about 1 minute more. Repeat with the remaining batter.
Place garlic, caraway seeds, and salt in a mortar; mash into a paste with a pestle. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add tomatoes, green bell pepper, green chile pepper, tomato sauce, and harissa. Stir in garlic paste and red chile pepper. Pour in water; bring to a boil. Reduce heat, cover, and cook until tomatoes are soft, 15 to 20 minutes. Uncover skillet and crack eggs into the tomato mixture. Cook and stir until eggs are set, 4 to 5 minutes. Spoon onto a serving platter; season with salt and pepper.
Combine eggs, egg whites, almond milk, vanilla extract, coconut sugar, and gelatin in a large bowl. Combine coconut flour, tapioca flour, almond flour, and salt in a separate bowl. Fold into the egg mixture and mix to just combine. Add arrowroot flour to thicken batter, if desired. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Bring a large pot of water to boil. Cook tomato, serrano chile, and garlic for 5 minutes. Drain and let cool slightly. Peel tomato. Combine tomato, serrano chile, garlic, salt, and pepper in a blender; blend until smooth. Heat oil in a small skillet over high heat. Fry tortillas individually until soft but not crispy, about 10 seconds. Place on a serving plate. Reduce heat to medium. Crack eggs into skillet and cook to desired consistency, 3 to 5 minutes. Spread 2 tablespoons refried beans on each tortilla. Add an egg and top with tomato sauce. Serve immediately.
Heat oil in a skillet over low heat. Add garlic, olives, capers, and anchovy; cook for 1-2 minutes. Add tomato passata and water, bring to a boil, and simmer until flavors combine, about 10 minutes. Add parsley and season with salt. Gently add eggs directly into tomato sauce without breaking the yolks. Cook until eggs are just cooked, 3 to 5 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil. Arrange bacon on the baking sheet in a single layer; edges can touch or slightly overlap. Sprinkle brown sugar generously on top. Sprinkle pecans over the sugar. Bake in the preheated oven until browned and glazed, 10 to 15 minutes.
Combine oats, almond milk, coconut, chia seeds, maple syrup, cinnamon, and salt in a jar. Stir well. Mix in chopped banana. Cover and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Add more almond milk to taste just before serving.
Combine oats, milk, yogurt, flaxseed meal, honey, and cinnamon in a glass jar; mix well. Fold in blueberries. Cover and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight.
Crack eggs in a bowl. Add salt and stir until well combined. Set aside. Heat salsa in a nonstick pan over medium-high heat to bubbling. Add tortilla chips and flip frequently to coat, 1 to 2 minutes. Transfer to a serving plate. Wipe out the pan and reduce heat to medium-low. Add butter and swirl around the pan to melt. Add eggs; stir frequently with a rubber spatula until scrambled to desired doneness, 3 to 5 minutes. Place cooked eggs on top of the plated tortilla chips. Top with shredded Cheddar cheese and sour cream.
Mix soy milk, Greek yogurt, oats, banana, honey, peanut butter, cocoa powder, chia seeds, and salt in a sealable Mason jar or container. Refrigerate for at least 4 hours before serving.
Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Stir in oregano and garlic salt. Add chives and saute for 1 minute. Add vegetarian crumbles and mushrooms. Continue cooking until mushrooms soften, about 5 minutes. Drain excess moisture and set aside. Beat eggs in a large bowl. Mix in curry powder and salt. Add milk and mix thoroughly. Stir in stuffing until all the bread is soaked. Stir in Cheddar cheese. Fold in mushroom mixture from the skillet. Grease a 9x13-inch casserole dish with cooking spray. Pour in casserole mixture. Cover and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C) the next morning. Bake in the preheated oven, covered, for 1 hour. Reduce oven temperature to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Uncover casserole and continue baking until top is browned, about 30 minutes more.
Combine buckwheat and all-purpose flour in a mixing bowl. Add buttermilk and yeast. Stir with a spoon until batter is smooth. Add more buttermilk, 1 tablespoon at a time, if batter is too stiff. Cover bowl with a dinner plate and let stand in a draft-free place, 8 hours to overnight. Add sugar, baking soda, and salt after the overnight rest. Mix in enough hot water to give batter a thin, pourable consistency. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Reserve some batter as a starter for the next batch.
Heat olive oil in a small, ovenproof skillet over medium heat. Add zucchini and a pinch of salt and cook until soft, about 5 minutes. Add chopped mint and dill, and cook 1 minute more. Beat eggs with salt and pepper in a small bowl. Pour into the hot skillet with the zucchini and briefly stir. Cook without stirring to allow the bottom of the frittata to set, about 2 minutes. Use a spatula around the edges of the skillet to ensure that the frittata isn't sticking as the bottom starts to set. Set an oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Lay the slices of Halloumi on the top of the frittata as the edges start to set. Place the skillet under the broiler until the top of the frittata is fully set and cheese is slightly browned, about 5 minutes. Serve immediately or at room temperature.
Heat oil in a saute pan over medium-high heat. Saute asparagus, shallot, green pepper, and Chinese okra until shallot is translucent, 5 to 7 minutes. Add tomatoes, salt, black pepper, garlic powder, white pepper, chile powder, and cumin. Cook and stir until spices smell toasted, 1 to 2 minutes. Pour eggs into the pan; cook until edges start to dry, about 2 minutes. Flip mixture over and cook until set, 2 to 3 minutes more. Transfer to a plate and sprinkle Thai basil on top.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray 3 large muffin cups with cooking spray. Mix egg and egg white together in a bowl. Add salt, pepper, garlic powder, and adobo seasoning. Add celery; beat to combine. Press ham slices snugly into the bottom of each muffin cup. Pour the egg and celery mixture on top. Cover with Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven, checking frequently, until eggs are set, about 35 minutes.
Combine hot coffee, cream, butter, xylitol, MCT oil, and vanilla extract in a travel mug. Secure the lid and shake until combined.
Combine soy milk, oats, and chia seeds in a mason jar. Layer banana on top, followed by strawberries and blueberries. Cover and refrigerate overnight. Stir together, adding more soy milk if necessary.
Combine banana, raspberries, and orange juice in a blender; puree until smooth. Pour into a breakfast bowl; top with flax seeds, chopped almonds, and extra raspberries.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease 2 loaf pans with some oil. Stir all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, oats, white sugar, brown sugar, flax seeds, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt together in a large bowl. Whisk oil, eggs, and yogurt in a smaller bowl. Stir into the flour mixture just until combined, using hands if batter is very thick. Fold in strawberries. Pour into the prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 50 to 60 minutes. Cool on a wire rack.
Add 1 cup water to a multi-functional pressure cooker (such as Instant Pot(R)). Place a steaming rack in the bottom of the pot. Combine eggs, Monterey Jack cheese, and cottage cheese in a blender and process until smooth. Add spinach, roasted red pepper, and green onion to the blender and pulse briefly to combine. Divide mixture evenly between the compartments of a silicone egg bites mold and tightly cover with aluminum foil. Lower the filled mold onto the rack inside the pressure cooker. Close and lock the lid; be sure vent is set to sealing. Select Steam function. Set timer for 10 minutes. Allow 5 minutes for pot to come up to pressure. Release pressure using the natural-release method according to manufacturer's instructions for 10 minutes. Release remaining pressure carefully using the quick-release method according to manufacturer's instructions, about 5 minutes. Unlock and remove the lid. Remove the silicone mold from the pot and allow egg bites to cool about 5 minutes before enjoying.
Bring water and quinoa to a boil in a saucepan. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until quinoa is tender, 15 to 20 minutes. Combine carrot, broccoli, and onion in the bowl of a food processor and chop. Heat sesame oil in a large skillet over medium heat and add garlic. Stir until fragrant, about 1 minute. Add chopped vegetable mixture from food processor. Cook and stir until onions are translucent, 3 to 5 minutes. Add kale; cook until wilted, about 1 minute. Add soy sauce and water; cook for 5 minutes more. Add chicken and 1/4 cup cooked quinoa to the skillet with the vegetable mixture. Cook and stir until heated through, 2 to 3 minutes. Transfer stir-fry to a plate. Spray the skillet with cooking spray and cook eggs to preference, 3 to 5 minutes. Place cooked eggs on top of stir-fry in the plate. Garnish with chile-garlic sauce, cilantro, and sesame seeds.
Mix flour, milk, egg, butter, sugar, baking powder, and salt together. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over low heat. Scoop 1/4 cup batter onto the griddle and cook until top and edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until lightly browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Combine pineapple, yogurt, soy milk, cream of coconut, and ice in a blender. Blend on high for about 2 minutes. Pour mixture into a cup.
Pour pineapple juice from both cans into a measuring cup. Add enough water to equal 3 cups. Bring pineapple juice-water mixture, coconut milk, and milk to a boil in a saucepan. Reduce heat to medium-low; add steel-cut oats and salt. Cook, stirring occasionally, until tender, about 20 minutes. Add more water if oats look dry. Add pineapple chunks, coconut, brown sugar, flax seeds, vanilla extract, and ginger to the oats. Cook until brown sugar dissolves and pineapple is heated through, about 10 minutes.
Grease a 1 1/2-quart souffle dish with butter. Whisk eggs, cream, salt, pepper, and nutmeg in a bowl. Stir in broccoli, onion, and Cheddar cheese. Pour egg mixture into the prepared souffle dish. Turn on a multi-functional pressure cooker (such as Instant Pot(R)). Pour water into the pot and insert the trivet. Place the prepared dish on the trivet with an aluminum foil sling, folding its ends on top. Close and lock the lid. Select high pressure according to manufacturer's instructions; set timer for 25 minutes. Allow 10 to 15 minutes for pressure to build. Release pressure using the natural-release method according to manufacturer's instructions, about 10 minutes. Complete releasing pressure using the quick-release method, about 5 minutes. Open and remove the lid. Lift quiche by grabbing the ends of the foil sling. Let cool for 5 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place pie crust in a 9-inch pie plate. Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Saute garlic until slightly toasted, about 2 minutes. Add mushrooms, kale, and onion; saute until leaves are wilted and onion is translucent, about 5 minutes. Combine tofu, egg replacer, Dijon mustard, nutritional yeast, lemon juice, onion powder, garlic powder, turmeric, and salt in a food processor. Blend until smooth. Pour into a bowl and fold in kale mixture. Pour mixture into the pie crust and level the top with a spatula. Bake in the preheated oven until center is firm and top is golden, 30 to 40 minutes. Cool for 10 minutes before serving.
Pour milk into a blender. Add flour, oil, sugar, baking powder, vanilla extract, and salt. Blend for a few seconds until combined. Scrape flour off the sides and continue blending until smooth. Cover and refrigerate batter, 8 hours to overnight. Blend water into the batter to restore the consistency. Preheat oven to the lowest setting; place a plate inside. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Pour a portion of the batter into the middle of the ungreased skillet. Cook until pancake starts to set and darken in color, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes more. Place on the plate in the oven to keep warm. Repeat with remaining batter.
Combine flour, wheat germ, soy flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt in a medium bowl. Add soy milk and oil and whisk until batter is smooth. Heat a dry, nonstick pan over medium heat. Pour batter into 5-inch circles. Peek under pancakes when edges appear dry; flip when bottoms are golden brown, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook other side until golden brown, about 1 minute more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Whisk all-purpose flour, wheat flour, ground flax seeds, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Make a well in the mixture. Add coconut milk, grated coconut, eggs, and coconut flavoring. Mix batter by hand until thoroughly combined. Preheat an outdoor grill for medium heat and spray grate with cooking spray. Grill pineapple slices until edges are slightly browned, turning occasionally, 3 to 8 minutes. Transfer pineapple to a plate lined with paper towels. Heat a nonstick griddle over medium heat, about 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray with cooking spray. Pour enough batter onto the griddle to form a 4-inch pancake. Cook for 45 seconds to 1 minute and carefully lay a cooked pineapple slice in the middle. Carefully spoon additional batter on top of the pineapple ring. Cook until pancake is firm around the pineapple, another 1 to 3 minutes. Flip the pancake using a spatula and cook the other side for 1 to 3 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter and pineapple rings.
Beat buttermilk, milk, eggs, butter, and vanilla extract together in a large bowl. Combine flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a smaller bowl; whisk into the buttermilk mixture until blended. Do not overmix batter. Squeeze juices out of the pineapple using a paper towel. Place pineapple, coconut, macadamia nuts, and chocolate chips in individual small bowls. Heat a skillet over medium heat and coat with cooking spray. Pour in 1/3 cup of batter for each pancake. Sprinkle a portion of pineapple over the wet batter in the skillet. Scatter some coconut, nuts, and chocolate on top. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Combine water, milk, and oats in a bowl. Cover and refrigerate, 12 hours to overnight. Mix in grated apples and lemon juice and sprinkle with ground hazelnuts. Divide between 2 bowls. Sweeten with honey and sprinkle with banana, apple, and grapes.
Grease a 1 1/2-quart souffle dish with butter. Whisk eggs, cream, salt, pepper, and nutmeg in a bowl. Stir in spinach, onion, and Gouda cheese. Pour into the prepared souffle dish. Turn on a multi-functional pressure cooker (such as Instant Pot(R)).  Place water in the pot and add the trivet. Place the prepared dish on the trivet with an aluminum sling, folding ends on top. Close and lock the lid. Select high pressure according to manufacturer's instructions; set timer for 25 minutes. Allow 10 to 15 minutes for pressure to build. Release pressure using the fast-release method, about 5 minutes. Open and remove the lid. Lift quiche by grabbing the ends of the foil sling. Let cool for 5 minutes.
Mix eggs, water, flour, soy sauce, baking powder, and salt together to make the batter. Heat oil in a pan over medium heat. Add onion; cook until soft and translucent, about 5 minutes. Add to the batter. Cook cabbage in the same pan until slightly wilted, 5 to 7 minutes. Add to the batter. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Cook soba in boiling water, stirring occasionally, until noodles are tender yet firm to the bite, 5 to 7 minutes. Drain and cut noodles into shorter pieces; add to the batter. Heat a flat frying pan over medium-high heat. Cook 1/4 cup of bacon until starting to crisp, 2 to 3 minutes. Arrange it in a small circle in the middle of the pan; add 1 cup of the batter. Cook until brown and crispy, flipping pancake halfway and pressing down with a spatula, about 5 minutes per side. Repeat with remaining bacon and pancake batter.
Combine coconut milk, water, ice cubes, avocado, spinach, erythritol, MCT oil, and vanilla powder in a blender. Blend until smooth.
Place mango, pineapple, acai, water, and lime juice in a blender; pulse until smooth and creamy. Pour mixture into 2 bowls; sprinkle with shredded coconut and chia seeds. Drizzle with agave.
Combine avocado, spinach, heavy cream, water, sweetener, coconut oil, vanilla extract, and ice in a blender; blend until smooth.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil and spread asparagus out in one layer. Drizzle with olive oil and season with salt and pepper; mix. Bake in the preheated oven until asparagus is tender, about 10 minutes. Meanwhile, saute pancetta in a skillet over medium-high heat until crisp, 4 to 5 minutes. Remove from heat. Remove asparagus from the oven. Cut off asparagus tips and set aside. Puree asparagus stalks in a blender. Reduce oven temperature to 315 degrees F (160 degrees C). Grease a loaf pan with butter and sprinkle with 1/2 tablespoon Parmesan cheese. Beat eggs with an electric mixer until foamy, 3 to 5 minutes. Carefully fold in milk, remaining Parmesan cheese, salt, and pepper. Fold in pureed asparagus. Pour mixture into the prepared loaf pan. Place asparagus tips on top in a decorative pattern. Bake in the preheated oven until sformato is lightly browned and starts to pull away from the edges, 30 to 40 minutes. Remove from oven, cool for a few minutes, and serve.
Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Spray a large skillet with cooking spray; warm over medium-high heat. Whisk eggs together in a bowl. Pour into the skillet; cook and stir until eggs are set, about 5 minutes. Arrange potato nuggets in a single layer on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, 17 to 19 minutes. Meanwhile, combine green onions and butter in a cold saucepan. Remove sausage links from plastic pouches. Place on a microwave-safe plate and cover with a paper towel. Microwave until heated through, 60 to 65 seconds. Cut sausages into small pieces and add to the onion-butter mixture; add bacon. Heat mixture over medium heat, stirring occasionally, until butter is melted. Stir slowly, adding a few spoonfuls of flour at a time, until mixture becomes a paste. Slowly drizzle in milk while mixing constantly. Reduce heat to low; cook and stir until a thick gravy is formed, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat. Stir in black pepper and cayenne pepper. Lay a tortilla on a microwave-safe plate. Place 2 slices Cheddar cheese down the middle of the tortilla. Spoon 1/4 of the scrambled eggs over the cheese. Add about 5 potato nuggets. Microwave until heated through, about 20 seconds. Spoon the gravy down the middle of the burrito. Microwave for 20 to 30 seconds more. Roll 1 of the opposing edges around the filling while burrito is still warm. Assemble 3 more burritos with remaining ingredients.
Mix grapefruit, rice milk, blueberries, yogurt, oats, banana, kiwi, and sugar together in a blender until smooth.
Juice beets and green apples, including peels, in an electric juicer. Combine apple-beet juice, avocado, pineapple, banana, and ice in a high-speed blender; blend until smooth.
Combine kale, cranberry juice, blueberries, beet, flax seeds, chia seeds, milk thistle seed powder, and green tea powder in a high speed blender (such as NutriBullet(R)). Add water to reach the blender's fill line. Blend until smooth.
Beat egg whites in a glass, metal, or ceramic bowl until stiff peaks form. Butter enough 3 1/2-inch ring molds to fill your frying pan. Place molds in the pan over low heat. Cover. Mix flour, sugar, baking powder, and baking soda in a bowl. Combine buttermilk, egg yolks, butter, and vanilla extract in a separate bowl. Add the flour mixture and stir until batter is fairly smooth. Fold egg whites into the batter until combined. Small bits of egg whites still showing is ok. Pour about 1/2 cup of batter into each mold and cover the pan. Cook until bubbles start forming at the top, about 5 minutes. Flip pancakes in their molds and cook until set, 3 to 4 minutes more.
Beat eggs and sugar together in a bowl using an electric mixer on medium speed until well blended. Mix flour and baking powder together in a separate bowl. Slowly mix into the sugar-egg mixture; batter will thicken rather quickly. Slowly add milk. Stir in vanilla extract. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Gradually add protein powder to almond milk in a medium bowl and whisk to combine. Add vanilla extract, stevia powder, and salt. Heat up a skillet over low heat and spray with nonstick spray. Pour in some batter in a round and let cook until set, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook for 2 minutes on the other side. Transfer to a plate. Repeat with remaining batter. Place blueberries and water in a mug. Heat in the microwave, stirring and mashing berries at 30-second intervals, until soft and syrupy, about 2 minutes total. Pour syrup over pancakes.
Combine apple, orange juice to cover, butter, sucralose, allspice, and candied ginger in a small saucepan and bring to a boil. Reduce heat to simmer and let the syrup cook until pancakes are ready to serve. Mix granola, soy milk, egg substitute, flour, applesauce, almonds, blueberries, wheat germ, vanilla extract, sucralose, cinnamon, baking soda, and baking powder together in a bowl to make the batter. Heat a nonstick griddle over medium-low heat. Spoon about 1/4 cup of the batter onto the griddle and cook until browned, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook for 1 minute more. Transfer pancake to a plate and cover to keep warm. Repeat with remaining batter. Serve with apple syrup.
Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Mix flour, sugar, and salt together in a bowl; add milk and eggs in that order. Stir until just a few lumps remain in the batter. Melt butter in a 9- or 10-inch oven-proof skillet over medium heat. Pour batter into skillet and wait for 1 minute. Place skillet in the preheated oven and bake until puffed and mostly set, 15 to 18 minutes.
Place banana, spinach, water, pineapple, whole almonds, celery, vanilla extract, and spirulina in a large high-speed blender. Blend until smooth, stopping to scrape the jar as necessary. Taste and stir in maple syrup. Pour mixture into a bowl. Garnish with blackberries, strawberries, cacao nibs, sliced almonds, coconut flakes, and bee pollen. Serve immediately.
Soak raisins in warm water while chard is cooking. Drain and pat dry. Cut chard leaves into strips and chop stems. Bring a large pot of lightly salted water to a boil. Cook chard leaves and stems for 5 minutes. Drain and set aside to cool. Press out excess liquid with your hands. Heat 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat and cook onion until soft and translucent, about 5 minutes. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a springform pan and sprinkle with bread crumbs. Turn springform pan over to remove excess bread crumbs. Beat eggs in a large bowl. Mix in chard, raisins, onion, walnuts, and Parmesan cheese. Season with salt and pepper. Spoon mixture into the prepared springform pan and sprinkle with a thin layer of bread crumbs. Drizzle with 1 tablespoon olive oil. Bake in the preheated oven until tart is lightly browned on the top, about 40 minutes.
Cut up margarine into oat milk and heat in the microwave for 30 to 60 seconds. Stir until margarine is melted. Pour oat milk mixture into a blender; add whole wheat flour, all-purpose flour, eggs, wheat germ, maple syrup, and vanilla extract. Blend until well combined. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Pour 1/5 of the batter onto the hot iron. Cook until waffle is golden brown and the iron stops steaming, about 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Line a pie plate with crust. Bake in the preheated oven until crust is set, about 10 minutes. Set aside. Melt butter in a saucepan over medium heat. Add leek and onions; cook and stir until soft and golden, about 5 minutes. Add garlic; heat until fragrant, about 1 minute. Transfer mixture to a bowl. Place ground chicken in the same saucepan. Cook, breaking up the meat with a wooden spoon, until chicken starts to brown but is still slightly pink, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat. Whisk oat milk, eggs, flour, and yogurt together in a large bowl. Spread leek mixture onto the bottom of the crust. Add chicken. Sprinkle mushrooms on top, followed by Gouda cheese. Pour egg mixture over the pie. Bake in the preheated oven until golden on top, about 40 minutes.
Soak potatoes in cool water for 20 minutes. Preheat the air fryer to 320 degrees F (160 degrees C). Drain the potatoes, dry them with a clean towel, and transfer to a large bowl. Drizzle 1 tablespoon olive oil over the potatoes and toss to coat. Add them to the preheated air fryer basket. Set the timer for 18 minutes. Put bell pepper, onion, and jalapeno in the bowl previously used for the potatoes. Sprinkle in 1/2 teaspoon olive oil, taco seasoning, ground cumin, salt, and pepper. Toss to coat. Transfer potatoes from the air fryer to the bowl with the vegetable mixture. Return the empty basket to the air fryer and raise the temperature to 356 degrees F (180 degrees C). Quickly toss the contents of the bowl to mix the potatoes evenly with the vegetables and seasoning. Transfer mixture into the basket. Cook for 6 minutes, shake the basket, and continue cooking until potatoes are browned and crispy, about 5 minutes more. Serve immediately.
Heat 1/2 of the oil in a pan over medium heat. Add onion and bell pepper; cook and stir until softened, about 5 minutes. Add tomato, garlic, cayenne pepper, salt, and pepper. Cook for 2 minutes more. Set salsa aside. Heat about 1 teaspoon oil in a pan. Add tortillas one at a time; cook until heated through, about 20 seconds each. Keep warm. Heat remaining oil in the same pan over medium-high heat. Pour in eggs. Cook until set to your desired consistency, 4 to 6 minutes. Spread a thin layer of refried beans onto each tortilla. Add a spoonful of salsa. Sprinkle with shredded cheese. Add a fried egg and sprinkle some more cheese, chopped jalapeno, and cilantro on top. Serve immediately with avocado and remaining refried beans and cheese on the side.
Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Lightly grease a jumbo muffin tin. Scramble egg whites, 4 eggs, 1/3 cup milk, and salt to taste in a bowl until light and fluffy. Fill each muffin tin compartment 1/2 full with egg mixture. Cover with aluminum foil. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set, about 25 minutes. Transfer eggs to a clean surface and immediately place 1 slice Cheddar cheese on each so they melt. Mix baking powder, flour, and 2 teaspoons salt together in a large bowl. Mix 4 eggs, syrup, sweetener, melted butter, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Pour into the bowl with the baking powder mixture, adding 1 quart milk as you mix. Stir until pancake batter is the consistency of melted peanut butter. Heat a griddle over medium heat and lightly coat with cooking spray. Pour approximately 1/4 cup batter onto the griddle, swirling the spoon to create a circular shape. Cook until bubbles form on the surface, 1 to 3 minutes. Flip only once and cook about 30 seconds more. Remove from griddle. Repeat with remaining batter. Allow all ingredients to coo. Make sandwiches using 2 pancakes as the bun and an egg and cheese portion in the center. Wrap each sandwich individually in plastic wrap. Place sandwiches in a resealable plastic freezer bag and store in the freezer.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Coat a large 6-cup muffin tin with butter. Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add tomato, ham, onion powder, and parsley. Cook and stir until tomato is warmed through and juice has evaporated, about 5 minutes. Whisk eggs, Cheddar cheese, and milk together in a large bowl with salt and pepper. Divide the ham mixture among the 6 muffin cups. Cover with egg mixture until about 3/4 full. Place muffin tin in a larger baking pan filled with hot water. Bake in the preheated oven until set, about 25 minutes. Cover with aluminum foil if tops start browning too much.
Bring water and quinoa to a boil in a saucepan. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until quinoa is tender, 15 to 20 minutes. Let cool briefly. Combine 1/2 cup quinoa and cottage cheese in a bowl. Accessorize with banana, blueberries, chia seeds, and cinnamon. Mix up and serve.
Combine oatmeal and protein powder in a microwave-safe bowl. Add blueberries, pumpkin seeds, and raisins. Add milk and heat in the microwave for about 1 minute. Stir before serving.
Mix water, oats, flax seeds, and cinnamon in a microwave-safe bowl. Cook on full power until oats are tender, 2 to 2 1/2 minutes. Stir in cottage cheese and blueberries.
Place margarine and salt in a bowl; add flour and rub to combine. Mix in enough water to make a dough. Knead for 1 minute. Lightly flour a work surface and roll pastry dough out to fit in a pie dish. Line pie dish with dough. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add carrot, onion, and garlic. Cook and stir until starting to soften, 3 to 5 minutes. Combine tofu and cashews in a blender and process. Add basil and pulse to combine. Add to the skillet with the vegetables and stir. Pour vegetable-tofu mixture into the pastry-lined pie dish. Bake in the preheated oven until set, about 30 minutes.
Combine acai pulp, mango, raspberries, and banana in a blender; blend until smooth, slowly adding almond milk. Pour equally into 2 bowls and add toppings of your choice.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 12-cup muffin tin with nonstick cooking spray. Place a thin layer of potato slices in the bottom of each muffin cup. Add a little butter on top. Bake in the preheated oven for 5 minutes. Mix eggs, tomato, bell pepper, spinach, ham, and onion together in a large bowl. Remove muffin tin from oven and ladle the egg mixture over the potatoes. Top each muffin cup with a mozzarella cube. Continue baking until egg bites are set, about 20 minutes.
Take each sausage patty and flatten it between a folded sheet of wax paper (I use a tortilla press to flatten mine). Freeze until semi-firm, about 30 minutes. Grease a skillet with cooking spray and heat over medium-high heat. Cook each sausage patty until lightly brown on each side, 2 to 3 minutes. Transfer patties to a rack over an aluminum foil-lined pan to allow grease to drain off. Wipe grease from skillet. Beat eggs and adobo seasoning in a bowl until light and frothy. Spray an egg ring mold with cooking spray and place into skillet. Pour egg into mold. Cook until egg is set on the outside, 2 to 3 minutes. Remove mold and flip egg to cook on the opposite side until set, 2 to 4 minutes more. Repeat with remaining egg mixture to make 5 portions. Split sandwich rolls apart. Top one half of each with 1 cooked sausage, 1 egg portion, and an equal amount of Muenster cheese. Place other half of roll on top. Wrap each sandwich in wax paper and aluminum foil. Store in the freezer until ready to reheat and eat.
Turn on a multi-functional pressure cooker (such as Instant Pot(R)) and select Saute function. Cook bacon, turning occasionally, until crisp, 5 to 7 minutes. Remove bacon from pot and drain grease. Add onion to the pot; saute until browned, about 5 minutes. Remove onion. Saute spinach until wilted, 2 to 3 minutes. Remove spinach and squeeze out excess liquid. Clean out Instant Pot(R) liner. Beat eggs in a medium bowl until yellow and frothy. Add onion, spinach, Swiss cheese, half-and-half, salt, garlic powder, lemon pepper. Stir in 1/2 of the cooked bacon. Spray stackable insert pans with cooking spray; divide egg mixture between the pans. Fill liner with 1/2 cup water. Cover pans with a lid and place inside the liner. Close and lock the lid. Select high pressure according to manufacturer's instructions; set timer for 20 minutes. Allow 10 to 15 minutes for pressure to build. Release pressure carefully using the quick-release method according to manufacturer's instructions, about 5 minutes. Unlock and remove the lid. Remove casserole from pans and garnish with remaining bacon.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Cook and stir sausage in a hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes. Drain and set aside. Separate crescent roll dough into 8 triangles. Arrange triangles on an ungreased 12-inch pie pan with points turned toward the center. Press over the bottom and up the sides to form a crust, sealing perforations completely. Spoon sausage over the crust. Sprinkle hash browns on top. Cover with Cheddar cheese. Beat eggs, milk, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Pour over the filling. Sprinkle Parmesan cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set and cheese is melted, 25 to 30 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Spray a medium skillet with cooking spray; warm over medium heat. Whisk eggs, tomato, bacon, cream cheese, parsley, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Pour into the skillet; cook and stir until eggs are set, 3 to 5 minutes. Spread pesto evenly over pizza crust and layer on the egg mixture. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until cheese is melted and pizza is hot, 10 to 15 minutes. Cut and serve.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a muffin tin with cooking spray. Mix flour, Cheddar cheese, spinach, corn, milk, egg whites, and tomato in a large bowl until well combined. Spoon mixture into the muffin tin. Bake in the preheated oven until tops are set and edges start to pull away from the sides of the muffin cups, 20 to 25 minutes. Cool for 5 minutes before removing from the tin.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Spray a 12-cup silicone muffin pan with cooking spray. Divide spinach and mushrooms evenly among the muffin cups, filling each about 2/3 full. Sprinkle 1 teaspoon mozzarella cheese on top. Beat eggs and sour cream together until well combined. Season with salt and pepper. Mix in Italian seasoning and garlic salt. Pour into muffin cups until almost full. Bake in the preheated oven until muffins have risen, tops are lightly browned, and a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 20 to 25 minutes. Loosen muffins with a butter knife and remove from the pan.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until half-cooked, 3 to 5 minutes. Pat slices dry using paper towels and place 1 around the inside of each cup of a large, 6-muffin tin. Whisk eggs and milk together in a bowl. Fill each muffin cup halfway with egg mixture. Top each with a pinch of shredded Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until set, 30 to 35 minutes. Remove from oven and top with any remaining cheese.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Spray a 6-cup muffin tin with baking spray with flour (such as Pam(R)). Heat a skillet over medium heat. Add chorizo and onion; pan fry about 10 minutes. Beat eggs in a bowl with a splash of water. Add shredded pepper Jack cheese and cilantro to egg mixture. Pour egg mixture into prepared muffin tin, filling each cup half-full. Spoon chorizo mixture evenly into cups. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center of a muffin comes out clean, 20 to 30 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Mix oats, pumpkin, milk powder, soy protein isolate, flour, sucralose sweetener, cinnamon, and baking powder together in a medium bowl. Flatten dough out onto the baking sheet to form 1 large cookie, or scoop dough into smaller cookies. Bake in the preheated oven until edges are golden, about 20 minutes.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Transfer bacon to a paper towel-lined plate, reserving grease in the skillet. Crumble bacon once cool. Add onion to the skillet and cook over medium-high heat for 2 minutes. Add ground beef and cook, breaking into smaller pieces, until no longer pink, about 5 minutes. Drain any excess grease. Add Worcestershire sauce, mustard, and ketchup to the beef mixture. Bring to a simmer, mixing until everything is incorporated. Meanwhile, heat a separate skillet over medium heat. Whisk eggs and milk together and pour into the skillet, swirling to coat the bottom. Cook until eggs are just set, about 5 minutes. Place bacon, beef mixture, tomatoes, pickles, and lettuce over one half of the omelette. Fold the other half over the filling. Top with Cheddar cheese. Cover skillet and cook until cheese is melted, about 1 minute. Garnish omelette with shoestring potatoes.
Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Spread almonds and walnuts on a rimmed baking sheet. Toast in the preheating oven until fragrant, 8 to 10 minutes. Transfer almonds and walnuts to a very large bowl. Add oats, apricots, cranberries, honey, olive oil, apricot preserves, wheat germ, sunflower seeds, chia seeds, flax seeds, oat bran, black sesame seeds, cinnamon, vanilla extract, and nutmeg. Mix well with your hands. Line the baking sheet with parchment paper. Spread granola mixture evenly across. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes. Stir the mixture; bake for 15 minutes more. Stir once again, then press the mixture down firmly. Return to the oven for 15 minutes more. Let granola cool and dry for at least 2 hours. Crumble and transfer to an airtight container.
Combine flour, butter, 1 egg, salt, and water in a large bowl and knead into a smooth dough. Shape into a ball, flatten, and wrap in plastic wrap. Refrigerate for 2 hours. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a springform pan with butter. Sprinkle a work surface with flour and roll out dough into a circle big enough to cover bottom and sides of the prepared springform pan. Line pan with the dough. Prick dough several times with a fork. Bake pastry in the preheated oven for 20 minutes. Meanwhile, stir together remaining eggs, cream cheese, and sour cream using a wooden spoon. Fold in Italian cheese blend and season with salt and pepper. Fold in basil. Remove cooked pastry from oven and cover with 1 layer of tomato slices. Pour half the egg-cheese mixture on top and cover with another layer of tomato slices. Spread remaining egg-cheese mixture on top and cover with a final layer of tomato slices. Bake in the preheated until tart is set, about 45 minutes. Serve warm.
Stir flour, pumpkin, egg, sugar, salt, and pumpkin pie spice together in a large bowl until well mixed; the mixture will be thick and chunky. Add baking powder and stir until evenly distributed. Slowly pour in 1/4 cup milk while stirring; mix until all liquid is absorbed. Add more milk and stir until batter is smooth and firm, yet flows off the spoon; a wooden spoon inserted into the mixture will stand, but batter will flow when poured. Mix in pecans. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Scoop 1/4 cup batter for each pancake onto the skillet. Cook until edges are dry, 1 to 2 minutes; flip and cook on the other side until edges are firm, another 1 to 2 minutes. Place a pat of butter on each pancake as they are removed from the skillet and transferred to a plate. Sift confectioners' sugar on top.
Combine almond milk and vinegar together in a measuring cup; set aside for 10 minutes. Combine water and flaxseed meal together in a bowl; allow to rest until gelatinous, about 5 minutes. Combine flour, coconut sugar, baking powder, cinnamon, baking soda, and salt in a medium bowl. Add almond milk mixture, flaxseed meal mixture, pumpkin puree, and coconut oil to the bowl with the flour mixture. Mix until well blended. Fold in pecans. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Bring a pot of water to a boil; add salt. Add spinach and cook until tender, about 1 minute. Drain and cut into 1-inch strips. Heat a skillet over medium heat. Add onion and cook until translucent, about 5 minutes. Combine eggs and natto in a bowl until natto is evenly distributed. Heat oil in a nonstick frying pan over medium heat. Add egg mixture and cook until nearly set, 3 to 5 minutes. Add cooked spinach and onion. Flip the omelette and finish cooking until fully set, about 2 minutes more.
Combine soy milk, ice, chocolate syrup, tahini, stevia, and mint in a blender. Blend until smooth.
Grate zucchini and press out excess moisture. Drain. Crack eggs into a large nonstick pan over low heat. Gently break yolks and marble into whites. Add zucchini and salsa as eggs cook. Cook until eggs are almost set, about 5 minutes. Grate in Cheddar cheese; cook until melted, about 2 minutes more. Stir and season with salt and pepper.
Beat eggs and milk in a bowl with a fork for about 30 seconds. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add garlic and cook for about 1 minute. Add red onion; cook until somewhat translucent, about 2 minutes. Reduce heat to low and add sun-dried tomatoes. Cook until sun-dried tomatoes are warm and soft, 3 to 5 minutes. Heat butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Pour in beaten eggs. Immediately add sun-dried tomato mixture. Sprinkle with salt and pepper. Add Parmesan cheese, oregano, thyme, and basil. Cook for 1 to 2 minutes, slowly folding in the edge of the egg mixture as it begins to thicken underneath and around the edge of the skillet. Cook for 2 to 3 minutes more, folding in the edges and scrambling the eggs.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Butter six 1/2-cup ramekins. Beat cream cheese in a bowl using an electric mixture until smooth. Beat in eggs 1 at a time, beating well after each addition. Add cream, blue cheese, nutmeg, black pepper, and salt. Mix well. Scoop mixture equally into prepared ramekins. Place filled ramekins into a 9x13-inch baking dish. Pour 1/2 inch of hot water into the bottom of the baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until souffles are golden brown and puffy, 30 to 35 minutes. Remove from baking dish and let rest 5 to 10 minutes. Dry bottoms of ramekins before serving.
Dissolve yeast in warm water. Add 3 cups flour and salt. Stir in the remaining flour, 1/2 cup at a time, beating well after each addition. Turn dough out on a lightly floured work surface. Knead until smooth, about 10 minutes. Grease a large bowl. Place dough in the bowl and turn to coat with oil. Cover and let rise in a warm place until doubled, about 1 hour. Preheat the oven to 500 degrees F (260 degrees C). Divide dough into 16 equal pieces and form into rounds. Roll into 1/4-inch-thick circles. Poke rounds with your fingers to create small indentations. Mix za'atar and olive oil together in a small bowl. Spread over circles. Place on ungreased baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven until dough is golden brown, 5 to 6 minutes.
Instant Oats: Stir together 1 cup any variety Almond Breeze almondmilk and instant oats in a microwave-safe bowl or mug. Microwave on high for 1 to 2 minutes. Stir again. Quick-Cooking Oats on the Stovetop: Stir together 1 cup any variety Almond Breeze almondmilk and 1/2 cup quick-cooking oats in a small saucepan. Cook over low heat for 1 minute, stirring frequently. Quick-Cooking Oats in the Microwave: Stir together 1 cup any variety Almond Breeze almondmilk and 1/2 cup quick-cooking oats in a microwave-safe bowl or mug. Microwave on high for 1 1/2 to 2 minutes. Stir oats. Rolled Oats on the Stovetop: Stir together 1 cup any variety Almond Breeze almondmilk and 1/2 cup rolled oats in a small saucepan. Cook over low heat for 5 minutes, stirring occasionally. Rolled Oats in the Microwave: Stir together 1 cup any variety Almond Breeze almondmilk and 1/2 cup rolled oats in a microwave-safe bowl or mug. Microwave on high for 2 1/2 to 3 minutes. Stir oats. Rolled Oats in the Instant Pot(R): Stir together 5 cups any variety of Almond Breeze almondmilk and 2 cups rolled oats in an Instant Pot(R) that is lightly coated with nonstick cooking spray or butter. Lock lid and close vent. Cook on high pressure for 3 minutes. Let stand for 5 minutes to allow pressure to release naturally. Carefully open vent, remove lid, and stir oats. Add additional Breeze if you prefer thinner oats. Rolled Oats in the Slow Cooker: Stir together 4 1/2 cups any variety of Almond Breeze almondmilk and 2 cups rolled oats in a slow cooker that is lightly coated with nonstick cooking spray or butter. Cover and cook on high for 3 to 1/2 hours or on low for 7 hours. Remove lid and stir oats. Add additional Breeze if you prefer thinner oats. Steel-Cut Oats on the Stovetop: Bring 3 cups any variety of Almond Breeze almondmilk and 1 cup steel-cut oats to a simmer in a medium saucepan. Cook over low heat for 10 to 20 minutes, stirring occasionally. Add additional Breeze if you prefer thinner oats. Steel-Cut Oats in the Instant Pot(R): Stir together 3 cups any variety of Almond Breeze almondmilk and 1 cup steel-cut oats in an Instant Pot(R) that is lightly coated with nonstick cooking spray or butter. Lock lid and close venting. Cook on high pressure set to 3 minutes. Let stand for 5 minutes to allow pressure to release naturally. Carefully open vent, remove lid, and stir oats. Add additional Breeze if you prefer thinner oats. Steel-Cut Oats in the Slow Cooker: Stir together 4 cups any variety of Almond Breeze almondmilk and 1 cup steel-cut oats in a slow cooker that is lightly coated with nonstick cooking spray or butter. Cover and cook on high for 3 1/2 to 4 hours or on low for 7 to 8 hours. Remove lid and stir oats. Add additional Breeze if you prefer thinner oats.
Combine water, steel-cut oats, almond milk, pumpkin puree, vanilla extract, pumpkin pie spice, and salt in a slow cooker. Cook on Low for 8 hours.
Bring a pot of water to a boil and add the asparagus upright, making sure the water does not touch the asparagus tips. Cook until soft but still firm to the bite, 10 to 15 minutes, depending on thickness. Drain and rinse under cold water. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly butter a baking dish. Place asparagus in one layer on the bottom of the baking dish. Season with salt and pepper. Toss with 1 tablespoon of olive oil and dot with knobs of butter. Sprinkle Parmesan cheese on top. Gently crack the eggs in the middle of the dish, being careful not to break the egg yolks. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set, 8 to 10 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 250 degrees F (120 degrees C). Combine sliced almonds, chopped almonds, pecans, cashews, pepitas, sunflower seeds, maple syrup, and olive oil in a bowl; mix well. Spread out on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until granola looks loose and dry, about 1 hour 20 minutes. Stir every 20 minutes. Let cool completely before transferring to an airtight container.
Bring water and almond milk to a boil in a medium saucepan. Add polenta and almond meal in a steady stream, whisking constantly to prevent lumps. Reduce heat to low and stir porridge frequently until thick, about 15 minutes. Stir in brown sugar and vanilla extract. Ladle porridge into bowls and top with berries and a dash of cinnamon.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir chorizo with mushrooms and onion in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes. Drain and discard fat. Combine diced tomatoes, chicken broth, and tomato paste in a Dutch oven over medium heat. Bring to a simmer and stir in the chorizo mixture and most of the crema, reserving a small amount to drizzle on top later. Cover and let simmer, stirring occasionally, until stew is the texture of a thick chili, at least 30 minutes. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly butter both sides of the bread slices and place on a baking sheet. Toast in the preheated oven, turning bread halfway, for 10 minutes. Fill a pot with water and add baking soda. Bring to a boil. Add eggs and boil for exactly 5 minutes and 45 seconds. Remove eggs and immediately place into an ice water bath to stop the cooking process. Remove shells. Place eggs into the chorizo stew to re-warm them. Top with queso fresco and drizzle with the remaining crema. Serve in bowls with pieces of toasted bread.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Fill a small ramekin a third of the way with heavy cream. Add smoked salmon strips and egg white. Season with salt and pepper. Place ramekin into a casserole dish and pour enough boiling water into the casserole dish so it reaches about halfway up the ramekin. Bake in the preheated oven until egg white is just set, about 10 minutes. Remove casserole dish from the oven and carefully slide egg yolk into ramekin. Sprinkle with dill and bake until egg yolk is hot but still runny, 1 to 2 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bring water and rice to a boil in a saucepan. Reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer until rice is tender and water has been absorbed, 20 to 25 minutes. Stir Colby-Jack cheese into the cooked rice; spread mixture over the bottom of a 9x13 glass baking dish. Combine sausage, bacon, mushrooms, green bell pepper, and onion in a bowl. Pour over rice in the baking dish. Beat eggs, milk, black pepper, and garlic powder together in a medium bowl. Pour evenly over the rice casserole. Top with Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until firm in the center, about 45 minutes. Remove from oven and let sit, 5 to 10 minutes.
Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add ham and cook until browned and crispy, stirring frequently, about 7 minutes. Beat eggs with 1 teaspoon chives, salt, and pepper in a small bowl and add to skillet, tilting skillet to distribute egg evenly on bottom of skillet. Cook until omelette has set at the edges. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese on top and fold omelette in half. Flip and cook until egg is entirely set and cheese inside has melted, 30 seconds to 1 minute. Slide onto a plate and sprinkle with remaining 1 teaspoon chives.
Combine eggs, milk, sunflower seeds, flax seeds, chervil, Italian herbs, garlic, salt, and pepper in a bowl and mix with a fork. Heat olive oil in a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Pour in egg mixture. Cook until egg starts to set, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle with dried basil and lay sliced Gouda cheese on top. Cut into 2 halves using a spatula. Fold each omelette in half and turn over. Cook for another minute. Serve garnished with fresh basil.
Bacon Potato Cakes: In large bowl, combine potatoes, bacon, Parmesan cheese, flour, garlic, eggs, green onions, and cayenne pepper; season with salt and pepper. Heat olive oil in large skillet over medium-high heat. Scoop tablespoons of batter for each pancake, flattening with spatula, and cook until underside is nicely golden brown, about 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook on other side, about 2 minutes longer. To Serve: Place bacon potato cakes on plate and top with ham steak. Top with fried eggs, followed by sliced avocado fanned on top.
Pimento Cheese: Combine all ingredients but salt and pepper. Once combined, season with salt and pepper. Sliders: Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. In cast iron skillet or heavy-bottomed pan, melt butter and toast slider rolls until golden brown. Place spoonful of Pimento cheese on bottom half of each bun. Top with bacon and eggs and top of bun, place back in pan, and put in oven briefly to warm cheese.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F and grease a 9x13-inch baking dish with butter. In large saute pan, over medium-high heat, add sausage and cook, stirring often until browned and almost cooked through, about 5 minutes. Remove, leaving 1 tablespoon of fat in pan, and reserve. Add onion and mushrooms and cook until browned, about 5 minutes. Remove from pan and allow to cool slightly. In large mixing bowl, combine reserved sausage, mushroom/onion mixture, biscuits, Cheddar cheese, and parsley. Toss to combine and season. In separate bowl, whisk together eggs and half-and-half. Pour egg mixture over bread mixture and stir to combine. Place in baking dish and allow to set for 10 minutes at room temperature to allow biscuit to absorb liquid and soften. Place in preheated oven and bake for 20 to 25 minutes, or until golden brown and warmed through.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Melt butter in small saucepan over medium heat and add flour. Allow to cook, stirring frequently, for 2 minutes. Add milk, whisking constantly until just reaching a simmer. Stir in cheese and season with salt and pepper. Place naan on baking sheet and top generously with cheese sauce, leaving a little crust uncovered. Top with potato slices, leaving open place in center for egg, followed by sausage. Place egg in center and bake until lightly browned and warmed through, 8 to 10 minutes. Remove from oven and top with fresh rosemary.
Preheat the oven to 500 degrees F. Roll pizza dough into rough rectangle and place on parchment-lined baking sheet. Spread pizza sauce over dough, leaving 1-inch border on 3 sides. Top with ham, sausage, scrambled eggs, peppers, spinach, and Provolone cheese. Brush edges with egg wash. Fold up sides about 1 inch and brush with more egg wash. Roll up like a jelly roll lengthwise, starting along bottom edge of dough. Place seam-side down, brush with egg wash, and top with parsley and Parmesan cheese. Gently cut slits along top. Place in preheated oven and cook for 8 to 10 minutes, or until golden brown.
Whipped Hazelnut Spread: With electric mixer, or by hand, whisk heavy cream until soft peaks form. Add hazelnut spread and whip for an additional minute or until well combined and smooth. Caramelized Bananas: Melt butter in medium saucepan over medium heat. Add in brown sugar and cinnamon and stir until dissolved. Once mixture starts to bubble, add bananas. Cook until bananas are caramelized and slightly softened, 5 to 10 minutes. Toast: In cast-iron pan or griddle over medium heat, add bacon fat and cook toast on both sides until browned and toasted. Remove and allow to cool slightly. To toasted bread, add whipped hazelnut spread, caramelized bananas, and bacon. Garnish with chopped hazelnuts and powdered sugar.
Sausage Gravy: In medium saute pan, cook sausage until rendered and well browned. Remove and reserve. Add onions and cook for 5 minutes, or until translucent. Add butter until melted; then whisk in flour. Cook for 1 minute, stirring constantly. Add milk and chicken stock, whisking thoroughly. Add in reserved sausage. Cook over medium heat until thickened, about 5 minutes. Add more liquid if necessary to thin. Season to taste. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Heat vegetable oil in an oven-safe skillet over high heat. Add smashed fingerling potatoes and cook until crispy and well browned, about 5 minutes per side. Top potatoes with sausage gravy and cheese curds. Bake until warmed through and cheese is melted, about 15 minutes. Garnish with chives and pickled peppers.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil. Whisk eggs, yogurt, egg whites, and taco seasoning in a large bowl until smooth. Gently stir avocado, Cheddar cheese, onion, and green chiles into the bowl with the egg mixture. Do not over-stir; keep avocado in diced form. Place red, green, yellow, and orange bell pepper halves on the baking sheet. Spoon egg mixture into the bell pepper halves, filling them to just below the edges. Bake in the preheated oven until egg mixture is just set, 35 to 40 minutes. Remove from oven and let cool slightly, 5 to 10 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place baguette slices on a baking sheet. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes. Transfer to a plate. Cook and stir onion in the same skillet until softened, 3 to 5 minutes. Add eggs and sausage; stir until eggs are set, about 5 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. Divide egg mixture among baguette slices and sprinkle Cheddar cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until cheese is melted, 8 to 10 minutes.
Heat a skillet over medium-high heat. Add sausage, cayenne pepper, red pepper flakes, chili powder, and paprika. Cook and stir until sausage is halfway browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Add red bell pepper, yellow bell pepper, onion, and jalapeno pepper. Saute until sausage is no longer pink and peppers are slightly softened, about 5 minutes more. Drain and discard grease; transfer sausage mixture to a bowl. Whisk 2 eggs with a dash of half-and-half in a bowl. Wipe the same skillet clean; add 1 tablespoon butter and heat over medium-low heat. Add eggs. Cook until edges start to harden, 1 to 2 minutes. Lift the omelet with a spatula as the center rises; tilt the skillet so that uncooked eggs run to the center of the pan. Sprinkle cheese over the omelet; top half with 1/3 of the sausage mixture. Flip over to fold and cook until set, 2 to 4 minutes. Transfer omelet to a plate. Repeat steps 2 and 3 with the remaining eggs, half-and-half, butter, and sausage mixture to complete the remaining 2 omelets.
Combine eggs, turkey bacon, mushrooms, onion, green bell pepper, red bell pepper, and Creole seasoning in a bowl. Stir egg mixture well to combine. Heat a skillet over medium-low heat. Add oil. Pour egg mixture into the skillet. Cook until edges are dry, about 5 minutes. Flip omelet over. Place Cheddar cheese slices on top of the omelet and cook until set, 5 minutes more. Fold omelet over the cheese. Flip again and cook 2 minutes. Flip once more and cook until cheese is melted, about 2 minutes more. Remove omelet from the pan and allow to sit for 1 minute to cool.
Heat oil in a medium-sized skillet over medium heat. Whisk egg whites, egg, and milk together in a small bowl. Toss tomato, onion, mushrooms, and spinach together in a separate bowl. Pour egg mixture into the hot skillet. Cook until firm on the bottom, about 1 minute. Flip the omelet using a spatula; don't be meticulous, it's supposed to be busted up. Immediately add the tomato mixture and sprinkle mozzarella and Parmesan cheeses on top. Let cheeses melt slightly, about 2 minutes. Push omelet onto a plate using the spatula. Season with salt and pepper.
Whisk 1/2 cup plus 1 tablespoon egg whites together in a bowl until frothy. Heat an omelet pan over high heat; spray with cooking spray. Pour in egg whites and swirl pan until eggs run to the edge. Reduce heat to medium-high; cook until edges are mostly solid, about 2 minutes. Tease edges from pan using a spatula. Let liquid egg whites run under the cooked edges. Use the spatula to keep the omelet sliding freely around the pan. Place ham and spinach onto the omelet and sprinkle Monterey Jack cheese on top. Sprinkle red pepper flakes, tarragon, oregano, and sage over the cheese. Cook until egg whites are set on the surface and the omelet slides freely in the pan, about 3 minutes more. Tilt the pan over a plate and fold the omelet in half as it slides onto the plate.
Mix flour, sugar, salt, and baking powder together in a large bowl. Mix yogurt, egg, water, and vanilla extract together in a small bowl. Pour yogurt mixture into flour mixture; mix until well incorporated. Add additional water by the tablespoon if needed to reach the right consistency. Heat oil in a griddle or skillet over medium heat. Use approximately 1/4 cup of batter per pancake. Cook until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes per side.
Combine oats, yogurt, eggs, chopped carrots, milk, protein powder, sugar, baking powder, cinnamon, salt, nutmeg, and ginger in a blender. Blend until batter is smooth. Fold in grated carrots. Heat a griddle over medium-high heat; spray with cooking spray. Scoop batter onto the griddle using a 1/4 measuring cup, and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
In medium saucepan, bring water to a boil. Stir in oats. Cook uncovered over medium heat, 1 minute for Quick Oats, 5 minutes for Old Fashioned Oats, stirring occasionally until most of the liquid is absorbed. Stir in ricotta, orange zest, and honey. Top with orange segments, walnuts, and brown sugar.
In large bowl, stir together oats, flax seeds, cinnamon, and ginger. Stir in cranberries. In small bowl, stir together almond butter, water, honey, and almond extract. Add to oat mixture and stir to combine well. Let stand 5 minutes or until mixture holds together when pressed. Line 8x4-inch loaf pan with foil, leaving some foil hanging over sides. Spray with nonstick cooking spray. Press oat mixture evenly into pan. Top with sliced almonds, pressing lightly. Cover with overhanging foil. Refrigerate until firm and set, about 2 hours. To serve, remove oat mixture from pan. Cut in half lengthwise, then crosswise into 12 pieces. Store, covered, at room temperature up to 2 days or refrigerate, covered, up to 1 week.
Place oats, chia seeds, and ginger into blender container. Blend until oats are finely ground. Add milk, berries, and honey; blend until berries are pureed and mixture is well combined. If thicker, colder smoothie is desired, add 2 to 3 ice cubes and blend until smooth.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Stir oats, all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, baking powder, salt, and baking soda together in a bowl. Beat white sugar, brown sugar, and butter together in a large bowl using an electric mixer until fluffy. Beat in eggs, applesauce, and vanilla extract in that order. Stir in the oat-flour mixture until dough is just combined. Stir in chocolate chips. Drop 1/4 cup of the dough onto the prepared baking sheet. Repeat with the remaining dough, flattening each cookie slightly. Bake in the preheated oven until light brown at the edges, 12 to 15 minutes. Let cool on the baking sheet, 3 to 4 minutes. Transfer cookies to a wire rack to cool completely.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Lightly grease 2 muffin tins. Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil. Lay bacon strips in a single layer on the baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until browned and crisp, about 30 minutes. Reserve grease. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Chop into small pieces. Transfer bacon grease to a skillet. Cook onion in the skillet over medium heat until transparent. Drain on paper towels. Whisk eggs and milk together in a bowl. Add bacon, onion, spinach, Colby Jack cheese, hot pepper sauce, Italian seasoning, salt, and pepper. Scoop mixture into muffin pans using an ice cream scoop, filling cups 3/4 full. Bake in the preheated oven until muffins harden at the edges, about 50 minutes.
Heat olive oil in a medium saucepan over medium-low heat. Add red onion and garlic; cook and stir until garlic begins to brown, about 2 minutes. Pour eggs into the pan and distribute evenly to make a omelet. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese and mozzarella cheese on top. Dollop small portions of ricotta cheese onto the omelet. Cook omelet until edges start to harden, 1 to 2 minutes. Add tomatoes, parsley, and basil. Add onion powder; season with salt and pepper. Cook until eggs are set, 3 to 4 minutes. Run a spatula under the omelet and lift; fold in half and transfer to a plate.
In medium saucepan, bring water and orange juice to a boil. Stir in oats, dates, orange zest, cardamom, and cinnamon. Cook uncovered over medium heat, 1 minute for Quick Oats, 5 minutes for Old Fashioned Oats, stirring occasionally. Top with yogurt and pistachios.
In a medium saucepan, bring milk and water to a gentle boil (watch carefully). Stir in oats. Cook, uncovered, over medium heat, 1 minute for Quick Oats, 5 minutes for Old Fashioned Oats, stirring occasionally. Toss together pumpkin seeds, almonds, pecans, chocolate chips, cranberries, and coconut. Sprinkle over oatmeal.
In medium saucepan, bring water and milk to a boil. Stir in oats. Cook uncovered over medium heat, 1 minute for Quick Oats, 5 minutes for Old Fashioned Oats, stirring occasionally. Stir together almond butter, honey, cinnamon, and ginger, adding water 1 tablespoon at a time if mixture seems too thick. Stir into hot oatmeal. Top with chopped apple and almonds.
Combine blueberries, spinach, kale, kefir, cucumber, avocado, banana, and almonds in a blender. Process until smooth.
Place egg, coconut oil, and butter in a blender. Add hot coffee; blend on low until combined, about 1 minute. Pour into a coffee cup and sprinkle cinnamon on top of the froth.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Set a sous vide cooker inside a large heat-proof container and pour water to the fill line to make the water bath. Preheat sous vide to 172 degrees F (78 degrees C). Place red bell pepper, yellow bell pepper, and orange bell pepper quarters, cut sides down, onto a baking sheet, reserving 1 quarter of each pepper. Roast in the preheated oven until pepper skins are evenly charred, about 45 minutes. Remove from oven and let cool, at least 10 minutes. Remove pepper skins and dice the flesh. Combine diced peppers, eggs, cream cheese, cottage cheese, salt, and pepper in a food processor. Process until smooth. Place 5 tablespoons of the mixture into each jar. Place lids on the jars, screwing until fully closed yet loose enough to twist open with your fingertips. Submerge jars in the heated water bath using tongs; air bubbles will escape the jars. Set timer for 1 hour. Heat small saucepan over medium heat. Slice reserved bell pepper quarters into 1/4-inch strips. Cook and stir in the hot pan until tender but still crunchy, about 3 minutes. Cut each strip into 4 equal pieces. Take jars out of the bath and let cool. Remove lids and run a small rubber spatula around the edges of each jar to loosen the egg bite. Turn jars over and drop the egg bites onto serving plates. Arrange reserved bell pepper pieces into a cross over each egg bite.
Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add potatoes to the hot oil and season with salt and pepper. Cook without stirring until edges have started to brown, about 5 minutes. Toss potatoes and cook, stirring occasionally, until tender, about 15 minutes more. Add 1 chopped onion to the pan in the last 5 minutes. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a separate skillet over medium-high heat. Add remaining chopped onion. Cook until softened, about 5 minutes. Add garlic and saute until fragrant, about 2 minutes more. Stir in chili powder, cumin, and coriander. Cook and stir to coat, about 1 minute. Pour water into the pan and bring to a boil while scraping the browned bits of food off of the bottom of the pan with a wooden spoon. Place tortillas in the preheated oven and bake until pliable and slightly browned, about 5 minutes. Crumble tofu into the skillet with the onion-garlic mixture. Cook, stirring occasionally, until hot and coated with spices, about 15 minutes. Add nutritional yeast. Place a tortilla on a plate and add 1/4 cup cooked potatoes and 1/4 cup tofu mixture to the center. Roll up to make a burrito. Repeat with remaining potatoes, tofu, and tortillas.
Slice tofu into 1/8-inch-thick slices, laying pieces on a paper towel as you go. Season each side lightly with salt. Place cornmeal in a shallow bowl; add a pinch of salt and cinnamon and stir. Heat olive oil in a saucepan over medium-high heat. Dip each side of the tofu slices in the cornmeal mixture; gently tap off excess. Place tofu in the hot saucepan and cook until golden brown and crisp, 2 to 3 minutes per side.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan. Combine coconut oil, eggs, and vanilla extract in a large bowl; whisk well to combine. Add flour, sugar, baking soda, cinnamon, and salt. Stir well until combined. Fold in bananas, pineapple, and coconut; stir until just blended. Pour batter evenly into the prepared pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 1 hour. Cool in the pan for 10 minutes. Remove to a wire rack to cool completely.
Heat oil in a heavy-bottomed skillet over medium heat. Add onion; cook and stir until translucent, about 5 minutes. Add sausage, green bell pepper, and red bell pepper. Cook and stir until peppers start to soften, about 5 minutes. Stir red chile pepper, garlic, and cumin seed into the onion-bell pepper mixture until coated in oil. Add tomato. Bring to a boil. Reduce heat and simmer until vegetable mixture is thick, about 20 minutes. Season with salt and black pepper. Make 4 wells in the vegetable mixture and break an egg into each. Place the skillet on a simmer mat to prevent bottom from scorching. Cover and cook until eggs are set, about 10 minutes. Scatter the surface with cilantro and season with black pepper.
Beat eggs with 3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons mayonnaise in a bowl. Add Gouda cheese and flour; mix well. Pour 1/2 the batter into another bowl. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a skillet over medium heat and cook grated carrot while stirring until softened, about 5 minutes. Add the carrot to 1 portion of batter; mix a small bunch of dill into the other portion. Heat a nonstick or well-seasoned cast iron skillet over medium-low heat. Pour in 2 tablespoons of one of the batters; immediately rotate the pan in a circular motion to spread. Cook until edges are crispy, 1 to 2 minutes. Flip until browned and dry on the other side, 1 to 2 minutes more. Repeat with all the batters, ending up with a stack of dill crepes and a stack of carrot crepes. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a separate skillet over medium-low heat. Cook onion, while stirring, until soft and translucent, about 5 minutes. Add mushrooms; cook until liquid evaporates, about 5 minutes more. Remove from heat and season with salt and pepper. Blend cream cheese and 1/2 cup mayonnaise together in a bowl. Season with salt and pepper; add garlic and 2 sprigs dill. Spread a portion of cream cheese mixture over a dill crepe; add a layer of the mushroom-onion saute. Top with a carrot crepe, spread with more cream cheese, and top with some of the chicken. Repeat layers until all crepes are used up. Decorate with thinly sliced cucumber. Cover with plastic wrap and chill until ready to serve.
Whisk 1 cup plus 3 tablespoons flour, kefir, egg, sugar, baking soda, and salt together in a large bowl to make a batter. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium-low heat. Heat oil in the skillet. Pour 1 to 2 tablespoons of the batter into the skillet for each pancake. Cook until bubbles form on the surface, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease and flour 3 5x7-inch loaf pans. Combine sugar, pumpkin puree, applesauce, vegetable oil, and water together in a large bowl. Mix flour, salt, cinnamon, nutmeg, cloves, baking soda, baking powder, and ginger together in a bowl. Stir into pumpkin mixture gradually, until combined. Fold in walnuts and raisins. Pour into prepared loaf pans. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center of a loaf comes out clean, 45 to 60 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Spray an 8x8-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Allow mixed vegetables to cool once cooked. Combine eggs, Shamrock Farms Premium Sour Cream, Shamrock Farms Cottage Cheese, flour, salt, and pepper in a medium bowl. Stir together or blend in a food processor until the mixture is smooth, about 1 minute. Pour the egg mixture into a bowl with the vegetables. Add 1 cup cheese and mix. Pour the mixture into the baking dish and smooth out the top. Top with remaining cheese. Bake until set, about 45 minutes. Remove the baking dish from the oven. The quiche will be puffed up, but will fall slightly as it cools. Allow it to cool, then refrigerate. Cut into squares and serve.
Preheat oven to 500 degrees F (260 degrees C). Grease a sheet pan with 1 tablespoon oil. Cook and crumble bacon. Combine mozzarella and Parmesan in a bowl; set aside. Combine Shamrock Farms Cottage Cheese, oregano, black pepper, and cayenne pepper, and 1 tablespoon oil in a bowl; set aside. Press and roll dough into a 15x11-inch rectangle on a floured counter. Transfer to the sheet pan and press dough to the edges. Brush edges with remaining 1 tablespoon oil. Parbake dough for 5 minutes; remove from oven. Spread cottage mixture evenly over the crust, leaving a 1-inch border around the edges. Sprinkle bacon over cottage cheese mixture. Sprinkle mozzarella mixture over the top. Make 2 rows of 3 small wells in the cheese, each about 3 inches across. Crack 1 egg into each well. Season with salt and pepper. Return to the oven and bake 9 to 10 minutes for slightly runny yolks, longer if you want them firmer. Cool slightly and sprinkle with scallions and chives.
Combine flour, xanthan gum, and salt in a bowl; mix well. Add butter and mix in using a pastry blender or fork until mixture resembles breadcrumbs. Stir in egg. Stir in water gradually, 1 teaspoon at a time, until moist. Knead dough until it comes together, about 3 minutes. Dust a sheet of parchment with gluten-free flour. Place dough on top, then cover with another sheet of parchment paper. Press down lightly to form a disc. Chill in the fridge for 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (180 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch pie dish with butter. Remove dough from the fridge and let stand at room temperature for 10 to 15 minutes; remove top sheet of parchment paper. Roll dough to 1/4-inch thick disc. Invert the pastry onto the pie dish and press down to evenly cover the bottom. Trim excess pastry. Cover with parchment paper; fill with beans or rice. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly golden, about 15 minutes. Remove from oven and let cool for 5 minutes. Brush bottom with Dijon mustard. Cook pancetta in a saucepan over medium heat until crispy, about 3 minutes. Add onions and cook until translucent, about 3 minutes more. Whisk eggs and cream together in a bowl. Season with salt, pepper, and ground nutmeg. Layer half of the pancetta mixture and half of the shredded Gouda cheese. Repeat layers; pour in egg mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until golden and set, about 30 minutes.
Mix flaxseed meal and warm water in a bowl; let stand for 5 minutes. Add oat flour and stir until well combined. Whisk in almond milk slowly to prevent lumps. Stir mashed banana, peanut butter, and salt into the batter. Heat sunflower oil in a saucepan over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the saucepan and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Whisk lingonberry jam and 1/4 cup melted butter together in a bowl to make the topping. Whisk milk, eggs, 2 tablespoons melted butter, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Whisk flour, sugar, and salt together in a separate bowl. Pour gradually into the milk mixture; whisk batter until smooth. Ladle 1/2 cup batter onto a lightly buttered skillet or crepe pan over medium heat. Swirl pan to spread the batter. Cook until top looks dry, about 2 minutes. Turn with a spatula; continue cooking until light golden, 1 to 2 minutes more. Place on a plate; spread with the topping and roll up the pancake. Repeat with the remaining batter and topping.
Mix soy milk, water, vegan butter, maple syrup, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Mix spelt flour, sugar, and salt together in a separate bowl. Mix soy milk mixture into flour mixture. Heat a skillet over medium-high heat. Pour batter into the center of the skillet and swirl so batter covers the entire bottom. Cook until golden brown, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook 1 minute more.
Combine eggs, orange juice, white sugar sugar, and salt in a blender. Add flour 3 tablespoons at a time; blend until all flour is mixed in. Refrigerate for 30 minutes to allow air bubbles to settle. Beat cream cheese, yogurt, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Add confectioners' sugar a little at a time until blended. Mix chocolate-hazelnut spread, milk, and butter together in a microwave-safe bowl. Heat in the microwave until combined and smooth, about 1 minute. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat; spray with cooking spray. Pour enough batter into the skillet to cover the bottom; keep crepes thin. Cook until firm enough to flip, 2 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook 10 to 20 seconds more. Remove from pan. Repeat with remaining batter. Place a crepe on a plate. Spread filling down the middle and layer banana slices on top. Fold crepe in thirds over the filling; pour hazelnut sauce over the crepe in a zigzag fashion.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a baking sheet lightly with cooking spray. Season chicken cutlets with salt and pepper. Spray a large skillet lightly with cooking spray. Heat over medium-high heat. Saute chicken cutlets until lightly browned and the juices run clear, 8 to 12 minutes. An instant-read thermometer inserted into the center should read at least 165 degrees F (74 degrees C). Transfer to a deep container; pull chicken apart with 2 forks. Heat olive oil in the hot skillet. Saute green bell peppers, yellow bell pepper, red bell pepper, portobello mushroom, and red onion until tender, about 7 minutes. Transfer vegetables to the container with the chicken. Add Monterey Jack cheese, mild Cheddar cheese, sharp Cheddar cheese, cumin, paprika, chili powder, and garlic. Mix well; season filling with salt and pepper. Whisk flour and eggs together in a bowl. Add milk and water, stirring to combine. Add butter and 1/4 teaspoon salt; beat until batter is smooth. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium high heat. Pour about 1/4 cup batter onto the griddle for each crepe. Tilt the pan with a circular motion so that the batter coats the surface evenly. Cook crepe until bottom is light brown, about 2 minutes. Loosen with a spatula; turn and cook the other side until lightly browned, about 30 seconds more. Place crepe on a plate. Repeat with the remaining batter. Spoon chicken filling into a crepe, wrap, and place on the prepared baking sheet. Repeat with remaining crepes and filling Bake in the preheated oven until cheeses melt, 5 to 10 minutes.
Place milk, flour, egg whites, applesauce, vanilla extract, sucralose sweetener, and salt in a bowl. Whisk batter thoroughly. Heat a large skillet over medium heat. Spray with cooking spray. Pour half of batter into the center of the skillet; turn skillet several times to spread evenly. Cook until golden brown, about 2 minutes. Flip carefully; add 1/2 the blueberries to the center of the crepe. Cook until bottom is golden brown, about 2 minutes more. Spoon 1/4 of the yogurt over the berries. Fold sides of crepe over the center; remove from skillet. Sprinkle lightly with 1/2 the sugar. Spoon another 1/4 of the yogurt on top; sprinkle with 1/2 the almonds. Repeat to make the second crepe.
Mix milk and salt together in a 4-cup bowl. Add eggs and beat until smooth. Add flour gradually and mix completely until batter is smooth and runny. Heat a 7-inch skillet over medium-low heat. Pour in 1/3 cup batter and turn the pan to spread it out evenly. Cook until set, 20 to 30 seconds. Flip and cook for 10 to 15 seconds more. Repeat with remaining batter. Place strawberries in a microwave-safe bowl and cook in the microwave for 1 minute. Push strawberries through a strainer set over a bowl to extract the juice; reserve strawberries. Pour juice into a saucepan over medium-low heat. Cook until warm, about 2 minutes. Mix water and cornstarch together in a bowl. Add to the heated juice; stir until thick, even, and smooth. Remove from heat and add strawberries. Slice banana and add to the strawberry mixture. Stir gently until thickened and cooled. Serve crepes topped with filling.
Combine flour, salt, and baking powder in a bowl. Whisk 3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons milk, egg, and 1 tablespoon melted butter together in a separate bowl. Mix into the flour mixture until batter is fully combined. Heat 1 tablespoon butter in a skillet over medium-low heat. Drop batter, 1 tablespoon at a time, onto the heated skillet. Cook until bubbles form, 1 1/2 to 2 minutes. Flip and continue cooking until brown, about 1 minute more. Lay on plate lined with a paper towel to help soak up excess butter. Repeat with the remaining batter.
Mix eggs, sugar, and salt together in a bowl. Add milk, flour, and oil. Mix until batter is smooth and thin. Heat 2 small nonstick skillets over medium heat. Lightly oil the skillets. Pour in enough batter to just cover the bottom of each skillet. Tilt the pans to spread batter evenly. Lift the blini carefully when edges start to brown, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook until the other side is browned, about 1 minute more. Stack blini on a plate.
Whisk flour, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Make a well in the center and add milk and egg. Whisk batter until combined. Fold in blueberries and chia seeds gently. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium-high heat. Grease the pan lightly with cooking spray. Pour 1/4 cup batter into the hot pan; cook until edges look dry and bubbles on top begin to pop, about 2 minutes. Flip and continue to cook for 1 minute.
Whisk flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt together in a bowl until no lumps remain. Add milk, eggs, and oil; whisk until batter is runny and well mixed. Heat a nonstick griddle over medium heat and lightly spray with cooking spray. Pour in a portion of the batter. Cook until bubbles form, 3 to 4 minutes. Turn and cook, pressing middle gently with the spatula, until lightly browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes more. Repeat with the remaining batter.
Stir flour, baking soda, cinnamon, and salt together in a large bowl. Whisk cottage cheese, milk, eggs, and oil together in a separate bowl. Pour into the flour mixture; whisk until batter is just combined; it will be thick. Heat an oiled griddle over medium-high heat; when a water drop on the surface dances and sizzles, it's ready. Drop 1/4 cup batter onto the griddle. Cook until golden brown and bubbles break the surface, 1 to 2 minutes. Turn and cook until set, about 1 minute more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Combine egg whites, oatmeal, cottage cheese, protein powder, stevia, vanilla extract, and cinnamon in a bowl. Mix well. Heat a skillet over medium-high heat. Spray with cooking spray. Pour 1/3 cup batter into the skillet; flatten batter using the back of a measuring cup. Cook until bubbles form, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until golden on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with the remaining batter.
Beat eggs in a bowl. Add milk, oil, and 1/2 teaspoon salt. Beat in flour using an electric mixer until well blended. Let batter stand for 15 to 30 minutes. Mix the remaining 1 teaspoon salt, cottage cheese, sugar, sour cream, egg yolk, and cinnamon together in a bowl to make the filling. Melt butter in a 6- to 7-inch skillet. Spoon a portion of the batter onto the skillet; cook until lightly browned on the bottom, about 3 minutes. Turn out onto a tea towel. Repeat with the remaining batter, thinning with small amounts of water if necessary and greasing the pan after every 2 to 3 blintzes. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a baking sheet. Melt the remaining butter in the skillet over low heat, about 1 minute. Place a blintz on a clean work surface with the uncooked side up. Add 1 tablespoon filling and roll up, completely covering the filling. Place on the prepared baking sheet. Repeat with the remaining blintzes. Brush filled blintzes with melted butter. Bake in the preheated oven until brown, 15 to 20 minutes.
Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add hash browns, sausage, and bacon. Fry until lightly browned, 5 to 7 minutes. Transfer to a plate. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Pour eggs into the hot skillet. Cook and stir until scrambled, 5 to 7 minutes. Transfer to the plate. Line a 14-inch round pizza pan with 1 1/2 cans dough. Arrange remaining dough over a 9x13-inch baking pan; pinch the pieces together to prevent separation when baking. Pour gravy mix into a small saucepan; whisk in 1 cup of cold water gradually. Cook over medium heat, stirring frequently, until gravy comes to a boil. Reduce heat and simmer for 1 minute. Allow to stand until thickened, about 4 minutes. Spread gravy over the dough; spread the hash brown mixture and cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until crusts are golden, 35 to 45 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Coat a baking sheet lightly with cooking spray. Heat a large skillet over medium heat. Add sausage; cook and stir until browned, 5 to 7 minutes. Remove sausage, reserving some of the grease. Add flour to the skillet and mix well. Stir in milk; season gravy with salt and pepper. Remove from heat. Separate biscuits and arrange side-by-side onto the prepared sheet. Press down biscuits to seal them together into a crust that covers the whole sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until crust is very lightly browned, about 5 minutes. Remove crust from oven and keep oven on. Press crust to flatten. Heat butter in a large nonstick skillet over medium heat until the foam disappears, about 2 minutes. Pour in eggs; cook and stir with a spatula until eggs are set but still moist, 3 to 4 minutes. Arrange eggs on the crust. Top with the sausage and gravy. Spread Cheddar cheese and mozzarella cheese over the pizza. Season with salt and pepper. Bake on the top rack of the hot oven until cheeses are bubbling and top begins to brown, about 10 minutes.
Combine whole wheat flour, dried apples, dry milk, powdered eggs, and baking powder in a large resealable plastic bag. Seal and shake until well combined. Pour water and vegetable oil into small lidded containers. Pour water over the whole wheat flour mixture when you're on the trail. Mix just until combined. Heat a cast iron skillet over a camp stove. Grease with oil. Drop batter by large spoonfuls into the skillet and cook until bubbles appear on the surface, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place turkey bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 5 minutes. Drain on paper towels. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a fluted tube pan (such as Bundt(R)) with cooking spray, making sure to thoroughly coat the bottom and sides. Open cans of biscuit dough and separate into individual biscuits. Cut each biscuit into 6 small pieces. Beat eggs, milk, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Dunk biscuit pieces into the egg mixture and layer into the fluted tube pan. Top each layer with a sprinkle of turkey bacon and Cheddar cheese. Pour any remaining egg mixture over the dough. Spray the top generously with cooking spray. Bake in the preheated oven until top is browned, about 40 minutes. Allow to cool until Cheddar cheese is set and the pan is easily handled, about 10 minutes. Invert onto a plate.
Place all ingredients into the well of a blender and blend until smooth. Add more milk or dulce de leche depending on thickness preference and blend again until smooth. Finish each smoothie with a small sprinkle of crushed almonds and serve immediately.
Preheat waffle iron and spray with cooking spray. Melt butter in a skillet over medium heat. Fry eggs to your desired doneness, 3 to 6 minutes. Season with sea salt and pepper. Transfer to a plate. Cook ham in the same skillet until golden brown, about 2 minutes per side. Place a piece of cinnamon roll dough in the waffle iron; cook until golden brown, about  5 minutes. Repeat with remaining dough to create 10 cinnamon roll waffles. Place a slice of Cheddar cheese on half of the cinnamon roll waffles; add an egg and a slice of ham. Cover each sandwich with another cinnamon roll waffle. Combine the cream cheese icing from the cinnamon rolls package with orange zest; mix until combined. Drizzle on top of the sandwiches.
Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add potatoes; cook and stir until tender throughout, 3 to 5 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. Add tomatoes; cook until warmed through, about 2 minutes. Add eggs spinach, garlic, and pesto. Cook and stir until eggs are no longer runny, 3 to 5 minutes. Transfer potato mixture to a bowl and add 2 cups Cheddar cheese; stir well and let cool for 10 minutes. Place 1 spring roll wrapper on a work surface in a diamond shape. Add 1 tablespoon Cheddar cheese and 1/2 cup potato mixture to the upper portion of the wrap. Fold bottom portion of triangle over filling. Brush edges with water; fold edges over and pinch to seal. Fill the rest of the wrappers with the remaining Cheddar cheese and potato mixture to make the pockets. Heat remaining oil in a skillet over medium heat until it reaches 350 degrees F (180 degrees C). Place pockets in the hot oil and cook until golden brown, 3 to 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes. Drain and discard grease. Place frozen hash browns and 3 tablespoons water into the same hot skillet. Cover and cook until no longer frozen and just starting to turn brown, about 5 minutes. Unroll crescent rolls. Place 4 rolls side-by-side and pinch together to make a square. Top dough with some of the sausage, hash browns, and Cheddar cheese. Fold edges over the filling. Repeat with the remaining 12 rolls to make 4 pockets total. Place pockets on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, about 10 minutes.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Heat a skillet over medium heat. Add eggs and about 2 tablespoons water; cook and stir until set but slightly moist, about 4 minutes. Spread salsa over pizza crust until just covered. Spread scrambled eggs evenly on top. Add Canadian bacon. Cover evenly with Mexican cheese blend. Scatter sausage and red bell pepper on top. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly browned, about 15 minutes.
Mix milk, oat flour, oats, egg, oil, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 1 minute more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Combine flour, butter, 1 egg, and salt in a bowl. Knead together with your hands, adding as much water as needed, in small amounts, to create a smooth dough. Shape dough into a ball, flatten, and wrap in plastic wrap. Refrigerate for at least 30 minutes. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a 10-inch springform pan. Heat olive oil in a skillet and cook leeks over medium heat until translucent, about 5 minutes. Remove dough from fridge. Dust a work surface with flour and roll out dough into a circle about 1 inch larger than the springform pan. Fold carefully in half, lift up, and unfold over the pan. Press over the bottom and 1 inch up the sides. Whisk 4 eggs and creme fraiche in a bowl. Stir in leeks, Gruyere cheese, Emmentaler cheese, and ham. Season with white pepper and nutmeg. Pour over the crust and spread evenly with the back of a spoon. Bake in the preheated oven until filling is set, about 30 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F (230 degrees C). Place 10 slices bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until crispy and evenly browned, 7 to 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels and crumble. Heat butter and olive oil in a same skillet over medium heat. Stir in mushrooms and onion. Add 1/4 teaspoon salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, until mushrooms and onions are slightly brown and tender, about 8 minutes. Sprinkle mushroom-onion mixture, crumbled bacon, Swiss cheese, Gruyere cheese, and green onions into the pie crust. Whisk eggs slightly in a bowl; beat in cream, 3/4 teaspoon salt, garlic powder, sugar, nutmeg, and cayenne pepper. Pour egg mixture carefully into the pie crust. Thread a toothpick through 1 end of 1 of the remaining bacon slices; roll the bacon around the toothpick to form a rose shape. Repeat with the remaining bacon slices. Arrange bacon roses on top of the quiche. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes. Reduce oven temperature to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Continue baking until a knife inserted in the middle comes out clean, about 30 minutes more. Cover with aluminum foil if top is getting too brown. Let quiche rest for 10 minutes before cutting.
Place almond milk, mango, bananas, rolled oats, and acai pulp in a blender; blend until smooth. Pour into 2 bowls and top with chia seeds and drizzle with maple syrup.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 2-quart casserole dish. Melt butter in a skillet over medium-low heat. Add garlic; stir in onion, sweet peppers, and green bell pepper. Cook until tender, about 5 minutes. Add mushrooms and cook until tender, 4 to 6 minutes. Add green chiles and stewed tomatoes; cook until heated through, 3 to 4 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. Spread mixture over the bottom of the prepared casserole dish. Whisk soy milk and eggs together in a large bowl until well blended. Add flour, cilantro, oregano, and cumin. Season with salt and pepper. Blend very well with the whisk until most of the lumps are gone. Sprinkle 1/2 cup Cheddar-Monterey Jack cheese blend on top of pepper mixture in the casserole. Pour in egg mixture and top with remaining cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until a fork inserted in the middle comes out clean and the top and sides are just beginning to crisp, about 45 minutes. Cool for 10 minutes before serving.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a casserole dish with cooking spray. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes. Drain and discard grease. Place sausage in the bottom of the prepared dish. Saute potatoes, onion, and green bell pepper in the same skillet until tender, about 6 minutes. Place mixture over the sausage. Sprinkle 1 cup Cheddar cheese on top. Beat eggs and milk together in a bowl and pour into the casserole dish. Add the rest of the Cheddar cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until cheese is melted and slightly browned, 15 to 20 minutes.
Spray or lightly grease a large skillet and heat over medium heat. Beat eggs, heavy cream, salt, and pepper in a bowl.  Pour eggs into the heated skillet, swirling the skillet to coat the bottom. Cover and let cook until eggs are firm, about 5 minutes. Top with Swiss cheese, ham, and green onions. Fold omelet in half over fillings; cook for 2 minutes more.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Cut each roll into 8 cubes. Spread onto a baking sheet in a single layer. Bake in the preheated oven until toasted, about 10 minutes. Layer toasted bread cubes in a 1 1/2-quart baking pan. Sprinkle 1/4 cup Swiss cheese, 1/4 cup Cheddar cheese, 1/2 the bacon, and 2 green onions on top of the bread. Shake to settle the toppings into the bread. Beat eggs together with half-and-half, milk, salt, and pepper in a bowl. Pour over the bread cubes, pressing cubes down into the mixture. Sprinkle the remaining Swiss cheese, Cheddar cheese, bacon, green onions, and Parmesan cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until strata is hot in the center, about 30 minutes.
Beat the egg yolks, then add the milk, sugar, wine, vanilla and cinnamon. Soak the slices of Bauducco Panettone in the egg mixture. Beat the whole eggs, then dip the slices of soaked Panettone on both sides. Drip dry and fry the slices in the butter until they're golden brown. To make the syrup, add all of the ingredients but vanilla to a saucepan on high heat and stir until it boils. Add the vanilla and continue boiling until it thickens.
Whisk flour, matcha, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Make a well in the center of the mixture; add 1 cup plus 1 tablespoon cashew milk, egg, olive oil, and vanilla extract. Whisk batter briefly until just combined with some small clumps of flour remaining. Add chocolate chips; stir again briefly. Grease a small saucepan lightly; heat over medium-low heat. Transfer 2 to 3 spoonfuls of batter onto the center of the pan, spreading batter with the back of the spoon. Cook until small bubbles start to rise to the surface and burst, about 1 minute. Flip and cook until edges are lightly golden brown, about 1 minute more.
Heat a skillet over medium heat and spray with cooking spray. Place frozen sausage patties in the skillet. Cook for 5 minutes; turn over and cook until heated through, about 5 minutes more. Transfer patties to a 9x13-inch baking pan and break them up with a fork. Mix eggs, milk, and salt into the baking pan with the sausage. Add spinach, Cheddar cheese, mushrooms, zucchini, and onion. Add bread and fold all ingredients together until uniformly mixed. Cover casserole with plastic wrap and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake the casserole in the preheated oven until eggs are set and a knife inserted in the center comes out clean, 1 hour to 1 hour and 15 minutes.
Mix cottage cheese, eggs, flour, onion, butter, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Mix in Cheddar cheese, mushrooms, and spinach. Transfer the mixture to a slow cooker. Cook, covered, on Low until eggs are set, 6 to 8 hours.
Whisk milk, 1 cup plus 3 tablespoons flour, eggs, and sugar together in a bowl. Add 1/4 cup melted butter; whisk well. Let batter sit, 15 to 20 minutes. Bring a pot of water to a boil. Add beef; cook until no longer pink, 5 to 7 minutes. Drain. Chop the boiled beef finely until even in texture. Heat 2 tablespoons butter in a skillet over medium-low heat. Add onion and cook, while stirring, until soft and golden, about 10 minutes. Increase heat to medium and add the chopped beef, salt, and pepper. Cook and stir filling until flavors combine, about 10 minutes. Heat oil in a nonstick or cast-iron skillet over medium heat. Pour 3 to 4 tablespoons of batter into the skillet and quickly rotate the skillet to spread batter out in a thin layer. Cook until edges are brown, 1 to 2 minutes. Run a spatula around the edge of the skillet to loosen blini; flip and cook until the other side has turned light brown, about 1 minute more. Repeat with remaining batter. Spread 2 tablespoons beef filling on 1 side of each blini. Fold edges over filling and roll blini up. Repeat with remaining filling and blini.
Blend brown sugar, honey, molasses, orange juice, and mustard together in a saucepan over medium-low heat until thickened, about 45 minutes. Remove from heat. Let glaze sit until flavors blend, 8 hours to overnight. Preheat oven to 225 degrees F (110 degrees C). Place ham in a roasting pan. Bake in the preheated oven, checking occasionally, about 10 hours. If ham begins to darken at that point, cover with aluminum foil. Continue baking, about 2 hours more. Increase oven temperature to 275 degrees F (135 degrees C). Bake, coating ham thoroughly with the glaze mixture every 30 minutes, about 2 hours more. Remove from the oven and let stand 15 to 20 minutes before slicing. Serve any remaining glaze with ham, if desired.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Wrap sweet potato with aluminum foil. Bake in the preheated oven until soft yet still a little firm, about 45 minutes. Remove foil. Slice sweet potato in half and scoop out part of the inside to make a hole for the egg and bacon. Wrap raw slice of bacon around the inside hole of each sweet potato half. Pour egg whites into the holes and place on a small baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until egg whites start to set, about 10 minutes. Remove sweet potatoes from the oven and add egg yolks on top. Bake until the egg white has been fully cooked, 10 to 15 minutes. Season with sea salt, pepper, garlic powder, rosemary leaves, and a drizzle of sriracha sauce.
Whisk soy milk, flour, sugar, nutritional yeast, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Dip both sides of each slice of bread in the mixture, adding more cinnamon as desired. Heat a nonstick griddle or frying pan over medium heat. Cook bread until toasted and golden brown, about 4 minutes per side.
Beat eggs and salt lightly in a bowl. Stir 1/2 cup plus 2 1/2 tablespoons lukewarm milk, yeast, and sugar together in a bowl. Let stand until foamy, about 5 minutes. Mix tipo 00 and bread flours together in a bowl. Make a well in the center. Add beaten eggs and yeast mixture. Mix together with a fork. Add water and mix again to form a sticky ball. Knead butter into the dough a little bit at a time. Transfer dough to a floured work surface and knead vigorously until smooth, about 10 minutes. Place in a lightly floured bowl, cover with a clean, damp cloth and let rest in a warm place until doubled in volume, about 1 1/2 hours. Turn dough out on a floured surface. Stretch out one piece and fold it over the top. Repeat with another section of dough, working your way around the circle. Place dough in a paper panettone mold. Cover with plastic wrap and let rise in a warm place until dough reaches the rim of the mold, about 2 hours. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Fill a baking dish with some water and place it on the bottom rack of the oven to keep the panettone moist as it bakes. Brush the top of the panettone with some milk and place the mold on a flat baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until a skewer inserted into the middle comes out clean, 40 to 45 minutes. Allow to cool on a wire rack for a few minutes. Pierce the side, near the bottom, with 2 long wooden skewers that will stick out the other side. Flip the panettone gently and set the skewers on the rim of a tall pot. Cool panettone upside down so it doesn't collapse, at least 5 hours. Mix tuna and mayonnaise together in a bowl until smooth. Blend olives, olive oil, anchovy fillets, and capers in another bowl until smooth. Mix cream cheese and ham together in a third bowl. Remove skewers gently from the panettone and slice lengthwise to obtain 6 slices, including the top. Lay the bottom slice on a serving plate; spread with tuna mixture. Cover with shrimp and lettuce. Press second slice on top; add third slice. Spread olive mixture on top and cover with mozzarella cheese. Press fourth slice on top; add fifth slice. Spread cream cheese mixture on top and cover with prosciutto. Cover with the top slice. Wrap panettone in plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 1 hour before serving. Slice into wedges from top to bottom.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Mix oats, cashews, almonds, sunflower seeds, hemp seeds, wheat germ, olive oil, honey, maple syrup, sesame seeds, salt, thyme, oregano, and red pepper flakes together in a large bowl. Whisk egg white in a small bowl until frothy.  Stir into granola mixture. Spread on the prepared baking sheet in a single layer. Bake until fragrant, about 15 minutes. Turn over sections of the granola using a flat spatula, trying to keep large clusters intact. Bake until evenly browned and dry to the touch, about 10 minutes more. Place baking sheet on a wire rack; let granola cool completely. Break up into clusters and transfer to an airtight container.
Layer soy milk, flour, oats, and maple syrup in a blender. Blend on medium speed for 2 minutes. Pour batter into a bowl or 4-cup measuring cup. Thin with more soy milk if needed. Heat a crepe pan or nonstick skillet over medium heat. Pour in 2 to 3 tablespoons of batter and tilt skillet in a circular motion to coat the bottom. Cook until edges start to curl up, 4 to 5 minutes. Flip and cook until second side is set, 3 to 4 minutes.
Preheat and grease a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Whisk flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt together in a large bowl. Whisk milk, eggs, butter, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl; stir into flour mixture just until batter is moistened. Pour 2 teaspoons batter into the preheated waffle iron for each waffle, leaving spaces between each. Insert a lollipop stick about 3/4 of the way into each pool of batter; close the lid. Cook until golden and crispy, about 1 minute. Transfer each waffle pop to a cooling rack and repeat with the remaining batter. Melt white chocolate in a microwave-safe glass or ceramic bowl in 15-second intervals, stirring after each interval, 1 to 3 minutes. Transfer melted white chocolate to a pastry bag fitted with a small writing tip or a resealable plastic bag with the corner snipped. Drizzle white chocolate over each waffle pop. Sprinkle coconut and candied ginger over the melted chocolate on each waffle pop, lightly pressing toppings to help stick to chocolate as it cools and firms.
Grease a waffle iron with cooking spray and preheat according to manufacturer's instructions. Whisk flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt together in a large bowl. Whisk milk, beaten eggs, butter, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Pour over flour mixture; stir until batter is just moistened. Scoop 2 teaspoons of batter into the waffle iron for each waffle pop, leaving space between each one. Insert a lollipop stick 3/4 of the way into each pool of batter. Close lid; cook until golden and crispy, about 1 minute. Transfer waffle pop to a cooling rack. Repeat with remaining batter and lollipop sticks. Melt white chocolate in a microwave-safe glass or ceramic bowl in 15-second intervals, stirring after each interval, 1 to 3 minutes. Scoop melted chocolate into a pastry bag fitted with a small writing tip or into a plastic resealable bag with a corner snipped off. Drizzle chocolate over one side of the waffle pops. Sprinkle candy sprinkles and colored sugar over pops while chocolate is still warm. Let cool until chocolate firms up, about 5 minutes.
Grease a waffle iron with cooking spray and preheat according to manufacturer's instructions. Whisk flour, sugar, baking powder, and 1/2 teaspoon salt together in a large bowl. Whisk milk, beaten eggs, butter, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Pour over flour mixture; stir until batter is just moistened. Scoop 2 teaspoons of batter into the waffle iron for each waffle pop, leaving space between each one. Insert a lollipop stick 3/4 of the way into each pool of batter. Close lid; cook until golden and crispy, about 1 minute. Transfer waffle pop to a cooling rack. Repeat with remaining batter and lollipop sticks. Melt dark chocolate in a microwave-safe glass or ceramic bowl in 15-second intervals, stirring after each interval, 1 to 3 minutes. Scoop melted chocolate into a pastry bag fitted with a small writing tip or into a plastic resealable bag with a corner snipped off. Drizzle chocolate over one side of the waffle pops. Sprinkle peanuts and a small pinch of flaked salt over pops while chocolate is still warm. Let cool until chocolate firms up, about 5 minutes.
Combine oats, water, and cacao powder in a saucepan; bring to a boil. Reduce heat and simmer until water is absorbed, about 5 minutes. Remove oatmeal from heat. Stir almond butter, flax meal, maple syrup, and vanilla extract into oatmeal. Transfer oatmeal to a bowl and top with banana and walnuts.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels, reserving bacon drippings in the skillet. Chop bacon. Whisk cassava flour, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Beat butter and coconut sugar together in a bowl using an electric mixer until fluffy. Add 3/4 cup coconut milk, 1/4 cup maple syrup, and egg; beat until well combined. Mix flour mixture into butter mixture until batter is smooth. Add bacon drippings, 1 tablespoon at a time, if batter is too thick. Mix chopped bacon into batter. Preheat donut maker according to manufacturer's instructions. Transfer batter to a clear plastic bag and snip off a corner; fill donut maker with batter according to manufacturer's instructions. Cook for 4 to 5 minutes. Transfer donuts to a wire rack to cool, about 15 minutes. Mix almond butter, 3 tablespoons maple syrup, and 2 tablespoons coconut milk together in a bowl until very smooth. Dip cooled donuts into almond butter topping.
Bring water to a boil in a small pot. Crack eggs into a big coffee mug or jar; season with salt. Whisk eggs, slowly pouring in 1 cup boiling water. Remove bubbles from the top of the eggs using a spoon. Lower coffee mug or jar gently into the pot of boiling water. Cover mug with a small plate. Cover pot with a lid and cook until eggs are set, about 10 minutes. Garnish with carrot and green onion.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Mix cream cheese, chocolate-hazelnut spread, berry cream cheese, milk, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Pour melted butter into a shallow bowl. Combine sugar and cinnamon in a separate shallow bowl. Flatten bread slices out on a work surface. Spread cream cheese mixture over each slice. Roll up each slice. Dip rolls in melted butter; coat with cinnamon sugar. Arrange seam-side down in a baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until lightly golden, 15 to 20 minutes.
Combine strawberry preserves and water in a small microwave-safe bowl. Microwave until warm, about 10 seconds. Stir in mango. Mix cottage cheese, cream cheese, and sugar together in a bowl until creamy and blended. Stir in pineapple and coconut. Tear crepe gently in half. Lay halves on a flat work surface with cut sides facing away from you. Spoon half of the cottage cheese mixture into the center of each half; fold in sides, top, and bottom like an envelope. Place seam-side down on a plate. Microwave preserves mixture to reheat, about 20 seconds. Stir and spoon over filled crepes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a large casserole dish. Place bacon in a skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, 5 to 8 minutes. Drain on paper towels. Cook and stir potatoes and onion in the skillet until golden brown, about 10 minutes. Add bacon and diced tomatoes; stir until heated through, 3 to 5 minutes. Pour potato mixture into the casserole dish. Whisk cream of chicken soup, milk, and eggs together in a bowl. Pour over potato mixture in the casserole dish. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set, about 40 minutes. Sprinkle Cheddar cheese on top. Continue baking until cheese is melted, about 5 minutes more.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x12-inch baking pan. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add hash browns and onion; cook and stir until hash browns are crispy, about 10 minutes. Place bacon in a separate skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Crumble into smaller pieces. Layer hash brown-onion mixture, bacon pieces, 1 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese, and green chile peppers in the bottom of the prepared baking pan. Crack eggs, one at a time, on top. Sprinkle remaining 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese over eggs. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are firm and cheese starts to brown, 20 to 30 minutes. Serve with flour tortillas.
Combine milk, 1 tablespoon sugar, and yeast in a small bowl. Let stand until yeast is frothy, about 10 minutes. Whisk egg in a small bowl. Place 1 tablespoon in a separate bowl; reserve for glazing. Sift flour into a large bowl; mix in salt. Add yeast mixture, beaten egg, 2 tablespoons ginger syrup, and 1 1/2 tablespoon melted butter. Knead until a smooth dough forms. Grease a large bowl with 1 teaspoon oil. Place dough in the greased bowl. Cover with a clean dish towel and let rise in a warm place until doubled, about 1 hour. Grease a 2-pound disposable loaf pan with remaining 1 teaspoon oil. Sprinkle remaining 1 tablespoon sugar and ginger syrup over the bottom and sides of the pan. Mix pearl sugar, 1 tablespoon melted butter, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Roll dough into a rectangle on a lightly floured work surface. Sprinkle 1/2 of the pearl sugar mixture on top; knead until evenly incorporated. Roll out again and add remaining pearl sugar mixture; knead until evenly incorporated. Shape dough into a loaf; place seam-side down in the prepared pan. Cover with a damp cloth and let rise until puffy, about 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Brush top of loaf with reserved beaten egg. Bake in the preheated oven until top is golden brown, about 30 minutes. Cool slightly in the pan before slicing, about 10 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch pie plate with butter. Unroll pastry crust and press against the bottom and sides of the pie plate. Pierce all over with a fork. Cover with a piece of parchment paper or aluminum foil; fill with ceramic pie weights. Bake in the preheated oven until light brown, about 15 minutes. Let cool, 5 to 10 minutes. Remove pie weights. Spread mustard over cooled crust. Cover mustard with flaked tuna. Arrange tomato slices over tuna. Whisk cream, eggs, salt, and pepper together in a bowl until smooth. Pour evenly over the tomato slices. Sprinkle Gruyere cheese over the egg mixture. Bake in the preheated oven until top is golden brown, about 30 minutes.
Mash 3/4 of banana slices in a bowl; stir in egg whites and oats to form a batter. Spray a skillet with cooking spray. Drop batter by large spoonfuls into the skillet and cook until browned, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Place oat cakes on a serving plate. Top with peanut butter and remaining banana slices.
Mix flour, flax seed meal, and baking powder together in a large bowl. Mash banana in a separate bowl, add coconut milk and egg; stir. Pour banana mixture into flour mixture; mix batter to combine. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Pour milk into a microwave-safe bowl. Heat in the microwave until warm, about 1 minute. Place butter in a microwave-safe bowl. Heat in the microwave until melted, about 30 seconds. Place eggs in a bowl; cover with warm water for 1 minute. Drain and crack into the bowl; beat lightly with a fork. Place warm milk, melted butter, eggs, salt, bread flour, purple yam powder, and bread machine yeast into a bread machine in the order listed. Run "Dough" cycle. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Transfer dough to a greased bowl. Deflate dough with your fist. Cut into 24 oval pieces. Roll each piece into a ball. Pour bread crumbs into a shallow plate; roll balls of dough in bread crumbs until coated. Arrange close together, slightly touching, in an ungreased baking pan. Bake in the preheated oven until tops are golden brown, about 15 minutes.
Dissolve yeast in 1/2 cup warm water. Sift flour and salt onto a clean work surface; make a well in the center. Add yeast mixture and 1/4 cup lard to the well. Mix, adding remaining 1 cup water gradually, until dough comes together. Knead until dough is soft and smooth, about 10 minutes. Transfer dough to an oiled bowl. Cover with a clean, damp cloth. Let rise in a warm place until doubled, about 90 minutes. Place dough back on the work surface. Punch gently to deflate; roll into a big rectangle. Brush 1/4 cup lard on top; cover with Parmesan cheese and pepper. Fold dough in half to make a smaller rectangle. Brush 1/4 cup lard on top; cover with pecorino Romano cheese and pepper. Fold dough again into a smaller rectangle. Brush remaining 1/4 cup lard on top; cover with salami chunks. Cut off a small portion of the dough; reserve. Roll dough into a long cylinder. Place cylinder a grease ring cake mold. Cover with a damp cloth. Let rise in a warm place until more than doubled in volume, about 3 hours. Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Tuck whole eggs into the ring of dough at even intervals. Divide reserved dough into 12 pieces; roll into small ropes. Lay 2 ropes in a cross shape over each egg to hold them in place. Bake in the preheated oven until golden, about 1 hour. Let cool before slicing.
Stir almond flour, eggs, almond milk, tapioca starch, vanilla extract, baking powder, and salt together in a bowl. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Beat soy milk, water, dairy-free margarine, maple syrup, 1 tablespoon sugar, and salt in a large bowl with an electric mixer. Beat in flour until batter is smooth. Cover bowl and refrigerate for 2 hours. Spray a small nonstick skillet or crepe pan with cooking spray; place over medium-high heat. Pour in 1/4 cup batter and swirl it around to cover the bottom of the skillet. Cook until golden brown, about 1 minute per side. Transfer to a plate. Repeat with remaining batter. Combine dairy-free cream cheese, 3/4 cup sugar, lemon zest, and lemon juice in a bowl; beat with an electric mixer until smooth and creamy. Combine maraschino cherries, 1/2 cup sugar, and cornstarch in a small saucepan over medium heat. Cook and stir until sugar melts and sauce thickens, about 5 minutes. Let cool. Fill crepes with cream filling; drizzle cherry sauce on top.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch deep-dish pie plate lightly with cooking spray. Mix 3 tablespoons water and flax seeds together in a bowl. Let stand until thickened, about 5 minutes. Combine almond meal, oat flour, parsley, oregano, and salt in a bowl. Stir in flax mixture and oil with a fork. Add remaining 3 tablespoons water; mix until a piece of dough holds together when squeezed. Press dough over the bottom and up the sides of the pie plate. Prick with a fork in several places. Bake in the preheated oven until pale golden, about 15 minutes. Remove from oven and let cool completely. Increase oven temperature to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place broccoli in a microwave-safe bowl. Microwave until tender, about 7 minutes. Melt coconut oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add onion and garlic; cook and stir until garlic is just starting to brown, about 3 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Combine tofu, yogurt, nutritional yeast, mirin, miso, lemon juice, nutmeg, and turmeric in a blender; blend on high, stopping to scrape down the sides, until smooth. Pour over onion mixture in the bowl. Stir broccoli and bacon bits into the tofu-onion mixture. Pour into the crust. Bake in the preheated oven until center is set, about 1 hour. Let rest for 20 minutes before slicing.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 9-inch cake pan with cooking spray. Combine brown sugar, half of the pudding mix, and cinnamon in a large resealable plastic bag. Seal and shake well until thoroughly combined and no lumps remain. Pour the remaining half of the pudding mix and 1/2 cup melted butter into a small bowl. Stir until combined. Dip each biscuit piece in the butter mixture and shake in the sugar mixture. Arrange half of the pieces into a layer on the bottom the prepared pan. Drop banana over the layer; sprinkle chocolate chips on top. Cover with a layer of of the remaining biscuit pieces. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown and no longer doughy in the center, 18 to 22 minutes. Cool monkey bread in the pan for 10 minutes. Invert onto a serving plate. Beat confectioners' sugar, 2 tablespoons butter, and cream in a bowl until smooth. Drizzle over monkey bread.
Place oats in a blender; blend until gritty, 3 to 4 pulses. Transfer oats to a bowl. Stir zucchini, egg, coconut flour, protein powder, and stevia into oats; mix well to combine into a batter. Heat a skillet over medium heat; spray with cooking spray. Pour batter into skillet; cook until edges look dry, about 3 minutes. Flip; cook for 2 minutes.
Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat; coat with cooking spray. Add tomatoes and mushrooms; cook and stir for 2 minutes. Add eggs, crabmeat, and Creole seasoning; cook until eggs are firm, 5 to 7 minutes.
Bring a small pot of water to a boil. Add eggs. Remove from heat; let stand for 15 minutes. Transfer eggs to a bowl of ice water to cool, about 5 minutes. Drain and chop. Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-low heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Blot with paper towels to remove grease. Chop into small pieces. Remove thick stems from kale. Chop leaves into thin, ribbon-like pieces. Place in a large bowl, pour in balsamic vinaigrette, and toss until evenly coated. Add eggs, bacon, Muscat grapes, parsley, salt, and pepper; toss well. Add 1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons pumpkin seeds and Parmesan cheese; toss well.
Preheat your waffle iron. In a large mixing bowl whisk together the flour, baking powder, salt, and cinnamon. Set aside. In a medium bowl whisk together milk, apple butter, maple syrup, melted butter, and eggs. Pour the liquid mixture into the flour mixture and stir to combine. If the batter seems too thick, thin it out with more milk until the desired consistency. Cook your waffles according to the manufacturer's directions for your waffle maker, and let them cool. (Mini waffles will cook faster than full sized.) Prepare the glaze. In a large bowl whisk together powdered sugar, 4 Tablespoons of milk and vanilla. The glaze will be think but not as thick as frosting. If it appears too think, thin it out with more milk. Set aside. Fill a high-sided pan with 2 inches of vegetable oil. Bring the oil to 365 degrees F. Once the oil is hot, add in about 4 waffles at a time and fry for 5 seconds on each side. (They should just crisp and turn a dark golden brown color.) Continue until all of the waffles are fried. Dip waffles one at a time into the glaze and let them cool on a rack in a rimmed baking sheet to harden. Serve the same day as making.
In a blender, combine mango, kale, almond milk, orange juice, Stevia In The Raw(R), and chia seeds. Blend until smooth.
Sift flour into a large bowl; mix in sugar and ground cinnamon. Stir in eggs and vanilla extract until well combined. Stir in milk gradually until batter is well combined and has the right consistency, not too runny and not too thick. Check consistency by filling a spoon with batter and tipping it to the side. Count the seconds it takes to fall back into the bowl; batter is ready when it takes about 4 seconds and leaves a small coating on the spoon. Rest mixture for 15 to 20 minutes to even out and thicken. Melt 1 1/2 teaspoons coconut oil in a skillet over medium heat. Remove from heat and pour 1/6 of the batter into the skillet, moving the skillet in circular motion so batter spreads out in an even circle. Return skillet to the heat. Cook pancake until bubbles start to form in the batter and the edges look dry, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip pancake using a spatula and continue to cook on the other side until pancake is lightly browned, about 2 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place tofu onto a plate and place another plate on top. Set a 3- to 5-pound weight on top. Press tofu for 20 to 30 minutes; drain and discard the accumulated liquid. Combine water and bouillon cube in a large microwave-safe bowl. Heat in the microwave on high until water is hot and cube is dissolved, about 2 minutes. Stir turmeric, liquid amino acid, onion powder, red pepper flakes, garlic powder, ground black pepper, ground ginger, and sage into the hot bouillon. Crumble tofu into the bowl and stir gently. Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Arrange potato nuggets on a baking sheet in a single layer. Bake in the preheated oven until crisp, 28 to 32 minutes. Heat a skillet over medium heat. Flatten ground vegan sausage onto a plate using a rubber spatula sprayed with cooking spray to prevent sticking. Slide sausage into the hot skillet; cook until browned on the bottom, 4 to 5 minutes. Flip and continue cooking, breaking sausage into smaller chunks, until fully browned. Transfer to a plate. Add tofu scramble mixture to the hot skillet. Cook until liquid has been absorbed, about 5 minutes. Place a tortilla on a microwave-safe plate. Sprinkle 2 tablespoons of mozzarella-style vegan cheese on top and heat in the microwave until melted, about 10 seconds. Place 6 cooked potato nuggets in 2 rows down the center of the tortilla. Add 2 tablespoons of cooked vegan sausage and 1/4 cup of the tofu scramble. Fold one side of the tortilla in to cover the rows of potato nuggets. Fold in 2 shorter sides, then roll the rest of the tortilla over to complete the burrito. Repeat with remaining tortillas, vegan cheese, potato nuggets, vegan sausage, and tofu scramble.
Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat and cook onion until soft and translucent, about 3 minutes. Add garlic and cook until fragrant, about 30 seconds. Add tofu and mushrooms and cook until tofu starts to brown, 8 to 10 minutes. Sir in soy sauce and parsley.
Place tofu, yogurt, almond milk, sweetener, cashews, and vanilla extract in a blender. Blend on grind setting until cashews are mostly broken. Select liquefy setting; add ice and blend until smooth. Pour smoothie into 2 tall glasses and sip through straws.
Spray a skillet with cooking spray; warm over medium-high heat. Whisk egg in a bowl. Pour into the skillet; cook and stir until set, about 5 minutes. Mash banana and tofu together in a bowl; add scrambled egg.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Generously coat a 10-inch Bundt pan with cooking spray; set aside. In a 12-inch skillet cook bacon over medium heat until browned and crisp. Remove to drain on paper towels. Very finely chop bacon. Set aside 2 tablespoons. In a medium bowl stir together the remaining bacon and brown sugar. Open cinnamon rolls; set icing aside. Separate cinnamon rolls. With kitchen scissors, cut each roll into 2 pieces. Shape each piece into a ball. Dip each ball in melted butter then roll in brown sugar mixture to coat. Layer coated balls in Bundt pan. Drizzle with any remaining butter. Sprinkle with any remaining sugar mixture. Bake about 40 minutes or until golden and a skewer inserted in the center comes out clean. Remove and cool in pan for 10 minutes. Loosen sides and carefully invert bread onto a serving platter. In small bowl stir together the icing and maple syrup. Drizzle bread with the icing mixture and sprinkle with reserved bacon.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Coat a 2-quart rectangular baking dish with cooking spray. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, salt, and pepper. Pour into prepared dish. Bake for 20 to 25 minutes or until set. Meanwhile, cut smoked sausage into 6 pieces. Halve each piece lengthwise, cutting to but not through the other side to keep the pieces together. Heat a 12-inch skillet over medium heat. Add sausage pieces to skillet, opening each like a book. Cook for 4 to 6 minutes or until browned, turning once. Remove and keep warm. In the same skillet, heat butter until melted. Add onion. Cook and stir over medium heat for 6 to 8 minutes or until just browned and tender. To assemble, spread cut sides of muffins or biscuits with horseradish. Cut baked egg mixture into 6 squares. On muffin bottoms, layer cheese, spinach, egg, sausage, and onion. Add muffin or biscuit tops.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a baking dish with cooking spray. Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat; stir in turkey sausage and spinach. Cook and stir until sausage is browned and spinach is wilted, about 5 minutes. Combine egg whites and almond milk in a large bowl; stir well. Add sage, thyme, oregano, red pepper flakes, basil, nutmeg, salt, and pepper. Layer grated sweet potatoes evenly on the bottom of the baking dish. Add turkey and spinach on top. Pour egg mixture over casserole. Sprinkle Parmesan cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until bubbly and the top is golden brown, about 45 minutes. Cut into 6 pieces.
Scoop out ulu flesh into a blender. Add eggs, milk, baking powder, cinnamon, nutmeg, and vanilla extract. Blend batter until smooth. Heat coconut oil in a griddle over medium heat. Pour up to 1/4 cup batter onto the griddle; reduce heat to low and cook, covered, until edges are set, about 3 minutes. Turn over and cook until pancake is browned on the other side, about 2 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Combine quinoa, oats, flaked coconut, cacao nibs, and molasses in a pot; cover with water. Bring to a boil and cover. Reduce heat and simmer until quinoa and oats are soft, 10 to 15 minutes. Add more water, 1 tablespoon at a time, if oatmeal becomes too dry.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Preheat a cast iron skillet over high heat. Blend milk, eggs, flour, cinnamon, ginger, allspice, salt, vanilla extract, cloves, and nutmeg together in a blender until batter is smooth. Melt clarified butter in the preheated skillet; pour in batter. Bake on the middle rack of the preheated oven until golden brown and puffed up to your liking, 20 to 25 minutes. Dust with confectioners' sugar.
Combine gluten-free flour, baking powder, salt, and cinnamon in a large bowl; mix well. Mix egg, vegetable oil, and vanilla extract together in a second bowl until well combined. Stir flour mixture into egg mixture with a wooden spoon until a lumpy batter forms. Pour in milk and mix until a smooth batter forms. Set batter aside to thicken, 5 to 10 minutes. Add more milk, 1 tablespoon at a time, if batter is too thick. Heat oil in a griddle over medium-low heat. Drop 1 to 2 heaped tablespoonfuls onto the griddle for each pancake. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Sift flour and salt into a large bowl. Combine 1 1/4 cups milk, egg, and oil in a second bowl and beat until well combined. Add milk mixture to flour mixture and stir to combine. Set batter aside for 30 minutes. Melt 1 teaspoon butter in an 8-inch skillet over medium heat. Pour a small ladleful of batter into the skillet. Immediately rotate the skillet until batter coats the cooking surface in a thin layer. Cook until the top of the crepe is no longer wet and the bottom has turned light brown, 1 to 2 minutes. Run a spatula around the edge of the skillet to loosen crepe; flip crepe and cook until the other side has turned light brown, about 1 minute more. Slide crepe onto a warmed plate. Repeat with remaining batter. Melt 2 teaspoons butter in a saucepan; stir in 1 tablespoon milk and hazelnut liqueur. Add confectioners' sugar and cocoa powder and keep warm over very low heat. Distribute crepes amongst plates. Add 1/4 of the banana slices onto each crepe and pour 1/4 of the chocolate sauce on top. Roll up crepe and fold. Dust with confectioners' sugar.
Heat 1/4 water and 3 tablespoons sugar in a saucepan over medium heat until mixture is simmering and sugar is dissolved. Remove from heat and allow syrup to cool to room temperature. Place raspberries in the bowl of a food processor; pulse until pureed. Pour cooled syrup into raspberry puree and mix well. Strain through a fine-meshed sieve into a container. Cover with plastic wrap and freeze until firm, at least 2 1/2 hours. Break up with a fork and place back in the freezer. Combine eggs, milk, 1/2 cup water, and 3 tablespoons melted butter in a bowl; beat with an electric mixer until smooth and creamy. Add flour and salt and mix until batter is smooth. Grease a 9-inch nonstick skillet with 1 teaspoon butter over medium heat. Pour a small ladleful of batter into the skillet. Immediately rotate the skillet until batter coats the cooking surface in a thin layer. Cook until the top of the crepe is no longer wet and the bottom has turned light brown, 1 to 2 minutes. Run a spatula around the edge of the skillet to loosen crepe; flip crepe and cook until the other side has turned light brown, about 1 minute more. Slide ready crepe onto a warmed plate and keep warm. Repeat with remaining batter. Arrange crepes on plates and dust with confectioners' sugar. Place a scoop of raspberry sorbet on the side and garnish with apple slices, fresh mint leaves, and red currants.
Mash banana in a bowl; add eggs and beat until well incorporated. Add cinnamon and stir. Heat butter in a skillet over medium-low heat. Pour a small amount of batter into the center of the skillet. Cook until pancake is firm, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip carefully and cook 1 minute more.
Place eggs, cream cheese, Parmesan cheese, and erythritol in a blender; blend on low until ingredients are completely combined. Sprinkle in coconut flour and xanthan gum while blender runs. Continue blending until thick, scraping the sides of the blender down at least once. Blend on medium speed for a few seconds. Let batter sit for 3 to 5 minutes. Heat a nonstick saucepan over medium heat; when a drop of water sizzles, it is ready. Reduce heat slightly. Lightly brush the pan and a spatula with butter. Stir the batter. Pour into a 1/4 cup measure and pour into the middle of the pan. Tilt the pan in a circular motion to spread the batter into 6- to 7-inch circle. Cook the crepe until the top looks dull and the edges brown, about 1 1/2 minutes. Work the spatula under the crepe; lift the edge. Grasp the crepe gently with the fingers of your other hand and lift it higher while sliding the spatula further under. Flip and cook 15 to 20 seconds more.
Mix milk, flour, eggs, melted butter, 2 tablespoons white sugar, and salt together in a bowl. Cover batter with plastic wrap and refrigerate 8 hours to overnight. Thin batter with water, mixing well, if it becomes too thick. Mix cottage cheese, cream cheese, confectioner's sugar, and vanilla extract together until well blended; the filling will not be smooth. Place blueberries in a saucepan and cover with water. Add 1/2 cup sugar and cook over medium-high heat until mixture starts to boil. Reduce heat a bit; simmer for 3 to 5 minutes to allow berries to release juice. Add more sugar if desired; simmer for 3 to 5 minutes more. Mix cornstarch with cold water in a bowl until dissolved. Remove berry mixture from heat and slowly pour in cornstarch mixture. Stir constantly until thickened. Melt 1/4 teaspoon butter in a skillet over medium heat. Pour batter into the skillet to make an 8-inch pancake. Cook until lightly browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip and brown the other side, about 1 minute more. Transfer to a plate to cool slightly. Add filling to the center of the pancake, roll up, and transfer to another plate. Top with berries. Repeat cooking, filling, and topping with the remaining batter.
Whisk 1 cup sugar, butter, water, 1/4 cup lemon juice, and egg yolk together in a heavy-bottomed saucepan over medium heat. Bring to a boil, stirring constantly. Cook until thickened, about 1 minute. Cover sauce to keep warm. Beat cream cheese, 1/4 cup mandarin orange juice, 1/4 cup sugar, 2 tablespoons lemon juice, and vanilla extract in a bowl using an electric mixer until well blended; mixture will be a bit lumpy. Blend milk, flour, and eggs together in a bowl using an electric mixer. Set a greased crepe pan over medium heat. Ladle batter in until just covering the bottom of the pan. Cook until top dries, about 3 minutes. Flip and set aside; repeat with the remaining batter. Spoon filling into crepes and fold over like a taco. Spoon mandarin orange pieces over filled crepes. Pour sauce on top.
Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Combine flour and sugar in a bowl. Mix in eggs. Mix in milk and water gradually. Stir in butter. Add vanilla. Brush a pan with oil; bring to medium-low heat. Add a portion of batter; tilt pan to spread batter into an even, thin layer. Cook until bottom just begins to brown, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook until other side is lightly browned, about 2 minutes more. Transfer crepe to a plate, separating finished crepes with sheets of parchment paper. Repeat with the remaining batter. Place a crepe on a plate. Sprinkle a portion of bacon on top; drizzle with maple syrup. Continuing stacking as many crepes and toppings to your liking. Top the final layer with a sprinkling of cinnamon.
Combine white rice flour, oat flour, tapioca starch, flax seed meal, oatmeal, 1/3 cup plus 2 tablespoons potato starch, brown sugar, baking powder, salt, cinnamon, and baking soda in a large bowl. Mix milk, eggs, applesauce, and vanilla extract together in a bowl. Make a well in the center of the flour mixture and add the milk mixture. Stir batter until liquids are fully incorporated. Heat a skillet over medium heat and lightly spray with cooking spray. Ladle the batter onto the pan using a 1/3-cup measuring cup. Cook until edges of pancake begin to dry, about 2 minutes. Flip and cook until other side is browned, about 2 minutes more.
Combine flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt in a large bowl. Mix milk, eggs, peanut butter, peanut oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Pour into the flour mixture; stir batter until smooth. Heat a nonstick griddle or skillet over medium-high heat. Drop about 1/4 cup batter onto the griddle. Sprinkle a few bacon pieces on top. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Heat oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Saute chard, spinach, and arugula until tender, about 3 minutes. Add garlic; cook and stir until fragrant, about 2 minutes. Mix eggs and cheese together in a bowl; pour into the chard mixture. Cover and cook until set, 5 to 7 minutes. Season with salt and pepper.
Whisk eggs and heavy cream together in a large bowl. Heat a large nonstick skillet over medium heat. Spread butter evenly over the surface of the pan; cook until foamy, 30 seconds to 1 minute. Add eggs; cook until beginning to set, about 4 minutes. Drop cream cheese pieces, salmon pieces, and scallions over the eggs. Continue cooking until eggs are set, about 2 minutes more. season with salt and pepper. Roll the omelet over onto itself; slide onto a plate. Top with dill, sour cream, and chives.
Combine egg yolks, creme fraiche, 1 tablespoon maple syrup, Dijon mustard, and 1 pinch salt in a food processor; pulse until well blended. Stir in chives and paprika with a spatula. Place in the refrigerator. Place bacon pieces in a nonstick skillet over medium heat; cook and stir until just crispy, 5 to 8 minutes. Transfer to a plate and toss with 1 tablespoon maple syrup until coated. Wipe most of the grease out of the skillet with a paper towel. Whisk eggs, heavy cream, nutmeg, and 1/4 teaspoon salt together in a shallow baking dish. Dip both sides of each brioche slice into the egg mixture. Return the skillet to medium-high heat. Add coated brioche slices; cook until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Place 1 piece of toasted brioche on each serving plate. Spread a spoonful of deviled egg mixture on top. Cover with another toasted brioche slice. Sprinkle bacon pieces on top.
Grate zucchini over the large holes of a box grater. Transfer to a fine-mesh strainer. Mix in 1 teaspoon salt. Set strainer over a bowl and let drain, about 10 minutes. Whisk creme fraiche, lemon juice, mayonnaise, and hot sauce together in a bowl. Stir in 1 teaspoon lemon zest. Place sauce in the refrigerator. Squeeze excess moisture from zucchini using a clean dish towel. Measure 2 cups grated zucchini into a bowl. Mix in eggs, scallions, thyme, and zest of 1 lemon. Combine flour, baking powder, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and pepper in a separate bowl. Fold gently into the zucchini mixture until a batter forms. Preheat oven to 200 degrees F (95 degrees C). Heat canola oil in a nonstick skillet over medium-high heat. Drop 2 tablespoons zucchini batter into the skillet; flatten with the back of the spoon. Cook until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Transfer to an oven-proof plate. Place in the warm oven. Repeat with remaining batter to make 3 more fritters. Fill a large saucepan with 2 to 3 inches of water and bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low, pour in rice vinegar, and keep the water at a gentle simmer. Crack each egg into a small ramekin or bowl. Slip eggs into the hot water one at a time while whisking the water. Cook until the whites are firm and the yolks have thickened, about 4 minutes. Remove eggs from the water with a slotted spoon and dab on a kitchen towel to dry. Place 1 poached egg over each zucchini fritter. Drizzle sauce on top. Garnish with chopped chives and paprika.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 12-cup muffin tin. Mix pancake mix, water, cinnamon, 1 teaspoon vanilla extract, and nutmeg together in a bowl. Fold in bacon. Transfer batter to a pitcher for easy pouring. Fill muffin cups to the top. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown, about 20 minutes. Mix heavy cream and sugar together until you see peaks. Add remaining 2 teaspoons vanilla extract. Top muffins with whipped topping.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Place bacon in a large skillet and cook over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, until evenly browned, about 10 minutes. Drain bacon slices on paper towels. Place frozen hash browns in the bottom of a 9x13-inch baking pan; season with salt and pepper. Spread onion and bell pepper over the hash browns; layer mushrooms slices on top. Add bacon. Beat milk, eggs, and salt together in a bowl. Pour mixture over the bacon, pressing lightly with a spatula to distribute. Spread Cheddar cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until egg mixture is set, 30 to 40 minutes.
Combine cassava flour, protein powder, coconut flour, and arrowroot flour; mix well. Combine banana, coconut milk, orange juice, and water in a blender; blend until smooth. Pour over flour mixture; add maple syrup and mix well. Add apple cider vinegar and baking soda; mix until batter is well combined. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Pour in 1/2 the batter; cook until golden brown and the iron stops steaming, about 5 minutes. Top each waffle with papaya, figs, shredded coconut, and shaved chocolate.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a muffin pan with paper liners. Combine bacon, onion, and green bell pepper in a medium mixing bowl. Divide bacon mixture among the muffin cups, filling each 3/4 full. Crack 1 egg into each cup. Sprinkle chives and a pinch of salt over each egg. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set, about 20 minutes.
Heat olive oil in an ovenproof skillet over medium heat; cook onion and garlic until soft and translucent, about 5 minutes. Add soy chorizo and cook, stirring often, until hot, about 5 minutes. Set oven rack about 6 inches from the heat source and preheat the oven's broiler. Beat eggs, milk, and salt in a small bowl. Pour into skillet and stir gently to make sure egg mixture reaches the bottom of skillet. Cook until eggs are set on the bottom and almost set on the top, about 5 minutes. Transfer skillet to the preheated oven and broil until the top is set and starts to brown, 3 to 5 minutes. Let rest 5 minutes before serving.
Preheat oven to 360 degrees F (182 degrees C). Beat 1 egg in a bowl using an electric mixer. Add flour, milk, baking powder, brown sugar, and salt. Mix until smooth like pancake batter. Whisk the remaining eggs in a separate bowl until fluffy. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook sausage, breaking it up with a spoon, until browned and crumbly, about 5 minutes. Pour about 1/4 inch of pancake batter into each cup of a 12-cup muffin tin. Add 1/4 inch of beaten eggs to each cup. Bake in the preheated oven, about 8 minutes. Top cupcakes with sausage and continue baking until set, about 8 minutes more. Let cool, about 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease 6 cups of a muffin tin with cooking spray. Cut 6 circles out of the bread slices using a glass or cup. Place 1 circle in the bottom of each of the muffin cups. Wrap 1 slice of bacon around the inside of each muffin cup. Bake in the preheated oven until the bread is toasted and bacon is cooked, about 8 minutes. Remove muffin tin from oven. Crack 1 egg into each cup and season each with salt and pepper. Sprinkle 1 heaping tablespoon of shredded Cheddar cheese on top of each egg. Return to the hot oven and bake until eggs are set, about 12 minutes.
Combine coconut flour and protein powder in a bowl. Whisk in eggs. Add milk, 1/4 cup at a time, mixing thoroughly, until batter is not too thick or too runny. Sprinkle batter with coconut flakes and chocolate chips; mix well. Grease a skillet with olive oil spray and place over medium-high heat. Fry banana slices until golden brown, about 3 minutes. Flip banana slices, add a drop of honey onto each one, and cook until caramelized, about 3 minutes. Transfer banana slices to a plate, keeping 3 in the skillet. Drop a large spoonful of batter over the banana slices in the same skillet. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining banana slices and batter.
Whisk baking mix, bran meal, sugar, flax seeds, chia seeds, and baking powder in a large bowl until well mixed. Whisk milk, eggs, oil, and vanilla extract in a separate bowl until well combined. Make a well in the center of the baking mix mixture; add egg mixture 1 tablespoon at a time, whisking well after each addition, until batter takes 1 to 2 seconds to fall off the whisk. Heat a griddle over medium-high heat. Grease with butter. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle about 4 inches apart and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip gently and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Mix 1 teaspoon sugar, water, and yeast together in a small bowl. Let stand until yeast softens and begins to form a creamy foam, about 5 minutes. Heat milk in a small saucepan over medium heat until it begins to bubble. Pour into a large bowl. Stir in 6 tablespoons butter until melted. Let mixture cool to 110 degrees F (43 degrees C), about 5 minutes. Mix remaining sugar, yeast mixture, 2 egg yolks, and salt into the milk mixture. Add 3 1/3 cups flour; knead dough until shiny and elastic. Place dough in a greased bowl, turning to coat both sides. Cover with greased plastic wrap; let rise until doubled, 1 to 2 hours. Combine cream cheese, 1 cup sugar, 2 egg yolks, orange liqueur, orange zest, and 1 vanilla extract in a large bowl; beat with an electric mixer until smooth. Mix 1/2 cup sugar and 6 tablespoons flour together in a bowl. Cut in 1/4 cup cold butter with a pastry blender or 2 knives. Stir in almonds. Grease two 9x5-inch loaf pans and line the bottom with parchment paper. Punch down dough and divide in half. Roll 1 half into a rectangle 1/8-inch thick; keep the other half covered. Spread 1/2 of the cream cheese mixture over the dough. Fold in the short ends of the dough and roll up tightly like a jelly roll. Transfer to a prepared loaf pan. Repeat with remaining dough and cream cheese mixture. Brush beaten egg white over the loaves; sprinkle almond topping evenly on top. Cover loaves with greased plastic wrap and let rise until dough reaches above the rim of the pans, about 1 hour. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake loaves in the preheated oven until golden brown and an instant-read thermometer inserted into the center registers 190 degrees F (88 degrees C), 40 to 50 minutes. Cool in the pans for 5 minutes. Run a knife along the sides to loosen; let cool completely, about 30 minutes.
Place bananas in a blender. Layer coconut milk, water, ice cubes, dates, cacao powder, ginger root, turmeric root, cinnamon, nutmeg, and vanilla extract over bananas, in that order. Cover and pulse until shake is very smooth. Dates will remain in chunks to represent "cookie dough chews".
Combine coffee, egg yolks, avocado, ice cubes, and coconut sugar in a blender; blend until smooth. Add coconut oil and blend until smooth.
Scrape vanilla bean seeds into a small saucepan over medium heat; add butter and cook until melted, 2 to 3 minutes. Whisk vanilla butter, brown sugar, egg whites, vanilla extract, and salt together in a bowl; add flour and beat until batter is smooth. Preheat a waffle cone maker according to manufacturer's instructions. Pour batter into the preheated waffle maker and cook according to instructions. Immediately wrap around a cone-shaped dowel or press into a bowl-shaped mold. Let each cone or bowl cool for a few minutes. Store in an airtight container for up to 2 days.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Mix crushed crackers and melted butter together in a bowl; press into the bottom and up the sides of a 9-inch springform pan. Bake in the preheated oven for 10 minutes. Remove crust from oven and brush egg white onto the crust, to seal. Bake 4 minutes more. Remove from oven and cool to room temperature. Season chicken with salt and pepper. Heat olive oil in a heavy large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir chicken just until brown, about 2 minutes per side. Transfer chicken to a plate. Reduce heat under skillet to medium-low; add 2 tablespoons butter. Cook and stir shallot in the hot butter until beginning to soften, about 2 minutes. Add mushrooms, garlic, rosemary, and 1 pinch salt; cook and stir until mushrooms are tender and juices evaporate, about 8 minutes. Whisk cream, eggs, 1/4 cup grated Parmesan cheese, 2 tablespoons parsley, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and 1/2 teaspoon pepper together in a bowl. Place baked crust on a baking sheet; top with chicken and mushrooms. Pour egg mixture over top. Sprinkle remaining 2 tablespoons Parmesan cheese over the top. Bake in the preheated oven until top is lightly golden and middle is set, 30 to 35 minutes. Let tart rest for 10 minutes. Remove outer ring. Top tart with 2 tablespoons remaining parsley.
Soak wooden skewers on a shallow bowl of water for 30 minutes; drain. Heat a skillet over medium-high heat; saute sausage links, turning every 2 minutes, until cooked through and browned, about 6 minutes. Thread each sausage onto a wooden skewer. Whisk maple syrup, cinnamon, and 1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper together in a saucepan over low heat until warmed, 2 to 4 minutes. Remove maple dip from heat. Heat about 2 inches of oil in a deep-fryer or large saucepan to 360 degrees F (182 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with paper towels. Whisk flour, cornmeal, sugar, baking powder, chili powder, and 1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper together in a bowl. Add milk and egg; whisk just until batter is smooth. Pour batter into a tall water glass to 3/4 full. Dip each sausage into the batter, swirling and dipping to evenly coat. Place the battered sausages gently in the hot oil, 4 at a time; cook, turning every 30 to 60 seconds, until evenly browned, 3 to 4 minutes. Adjust heat as needed to maintain 360 degrees F (182 degrees C). Transfer corn dogs to the paper towel-lined baking sheet. Serve with the maple dip.
Mash bananas in a large bowl with a fork. Add quinoa flour, soy milk, water, and cinnamon; mix until well blended. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Grease with cooking spray. Drop 1/3 cup of batter onto the hot iron; close and cook until browned, 8 to 10 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Whisk whole wheat flour and baking powder together in a bowl. Whisk in milk gradually until batter is smooth. Add kefir, egg, and oil; mix for 1 minute. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop 1/4 cup onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until lightly browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Stir warm soy milk, honey, and brown sugar together in a bowl until sugar is dissolved; stir in yeast and let sit until mixture becomes foamy, about 5 minutes. Stir 3 cups flour, ground flax seed, butter, and salt into yeast mixture. Mix remaining flour, 1/2 cup at a time, mixing well after each addition, until dough pulls together. Turn dough onto a lightly floured surface; knead until smooth and elastic, about 8 minutes. Lightly oil a large bowl and place dough in the bowl, turning to coat. Cover with a damp cloth and let rise in a warm place until doubled in volume, about 30 minutes. Carefully turn dough onto a lightly floured surface; punch dough down. Divide dough into 2 equal pieces and form into loaves. Place loaves into 2 lightly greased 9x5-inch loaf pans. Cover loaves with a damp cloth and let rise until doubled in volume, about 40 minutes. Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Place loaves in the preheated oven and reduce heat to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C); bake until the tops are golden brown and bottom of loaves sound hollow when tapped, 27 to 30 minutes.
Grease a nonstick skillet with cooking spray and place over medium heat. Combine banana and egg in a bowl. Mix all-purpose flour, quinoa flour, whole milk, water, sugar, honey, coconut oil, kosher salt, and baking powder together in a separate bowl; add to banana mixture until batter is smooth. Add more water if batter is too thick. Drop batter by 1/3 to 1/2 cup onto the skillet and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 1 to 2 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 1 minute. Repeat with remaining batter.
Combine whole wheat flour, quinoa flour, turbinado sugar, and baking powder in a large bowl. Whisk in egg and olive oil. Whisk in milk gradually until batter is a runny consistency. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Ladle 1/2 cup batter into the preheated iron; close and cook until golden, about 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Grease five 8x4-inch baking pans. Combine brown sugar, coconut, flour, raisins, fruit peel, cherries, baking powder, mixed essence, and nutmeg in a large bowl using a large wooden spoon. Combine margarine and shortening in a microwave-safe bowl; heat in microwave until melted, 30 seconds to 1 minute. Pour melted mixture into flour mixture, alternating with milk, until batter is just mixed. Add water, a teaspoon at a time, if more moisture is needed. Pour batter into the prepared baking pans, smoothing the tops with the back of a wet spoon. Sprinkle white sugar over each loaf. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick or skewer inserted in the middle comes out clean, about 1 hour. Cool in the pans for 5 minutes. Invert onto cooking racks.
Place bread flour, milk, eggs, sugar, butter, yeast, salt, and saffron in a bread machine in the order recommended by the manufacturer. Program the bread machine for the dough cycle; press "Start." Mix raisins into the dough by hand after the cycle is complete. Divide dough into 9 pieces. Roll each piece into a log 6 to 7 inches long. Pinch the ends of 3 logs together and form a 3-strand braid. Pinch ends together at the bottom of the braid. Repeat with remaining logs to make 2 more braided loaves. Transfer loaves to a baking sheet lined with parchment paper, placing them several inches apart. Cover loosely with plastic wrap and let rise until doubled, about 30 minutes. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until loaves are a light golden brown, about 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 275 degrees F (135 degrees C). Combine oats, honey, wheat germ, cocoa powder, cinnamon, and vanilla extract in a large bowl. Spread oat mixture on a large rimmed baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven, turning once, until lightly toasted, about 20 minutes. Stir in coconut and dried fruit. Continue baking until coconut is lightly toasted, about 10 minutes. Cool completely before transferring to an airtight container, about 15 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Combine oats, brown sugar, wheat germ, baking powder, salt, and cinnamon in a large bowl. Whisk milk, melted butter, and eggs together in a bowl. Pour over oat mixture; mix until blended. Fold in apple, peach, and blueberries. Pour mixture into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 35 to 40 minutes. Cut into squares.
Mix whole wheat flour, ground almonds, ground flax seeds, sugar, baking powder, salt, and baking soda together in a bowl. Whisk almond milk, bananas, egg, vegetable oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Mix into the whole wheat flour mixture until batter is just combined. Melt butter on a griddle over medium heat. Drop 1/3 cup batter onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Place all ingredients in a blender and blend until smooth.
Place all ingredients in a blender and blend until smooth.
Heat 1 tablespoon butter in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir spinach and corn until heated through, about 5 minutes. Stir in 1 tablespoon butter until melted, about 1 minute. Mix Gruyere cheese into spinach mixture; add lemon juice, salt, and pepper. Cook and stir over low heat until cheese melts, 2 to 3 minutes. Spoon spinach mixture into each crepe and top with hummus. Fold crepe around filling. Spoon hummus on top of each crepe and garnish with parsley.
Sift flour and salt together into a bowl and make a well in the middle. Pour in enough buttermilk to make a soft, but not sticky dough; mix well. Transfer dough to a well floured work surface and knead. Shape dough into a round about 1/2-inch thick. Cut dough into 4 or 8 farls (flatbread) using a bread knife. Lightly flour a griddle over medium heat; place farls on the griddle. Cook until lightly browned, 4 to 5 minutes per side.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Grease a 1-quart baking dish with 1 teaspoon butter. Arrange bread slices in a single layer in the baking dish. Whisk milk, 1 egg, nutmeg, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Pour over bread slices. Sprinkle Parmesan cheese on top. Let stand until milk mixture is absorbed, 15 to 30 minutes. Dot remaining 2 teaspoons butter over Parmesan cheese. Toss asparagus with olive oil in a bowl. Spread on a baking sheet. Season with salt and pepper. Bake bread slices in the preheated oven until puffed up, about 10 minutes. Place asparagus in the oven. Continue baking bread slices until golden brown, about 10 minutes more. Fill a large saucepan with 2 to 3 inches of water and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to medium-low to bring water to a gentle simmer. Crack 1 egg into a small bowl then gently slip egg into the simmering water, holding the bowl just above the surface of water. Repeat with the remaining egg. Cook eggs until the whites are firm and the yolks have thickened but still runny, 2 1/2 to 3 minutes. Remove the eggs from the water with a slotted spoon. Divide bread between 2 plates. Top each portion with a poached egg. Season with salt and pepper. Serve asparagus on the side.
Place juice, Carnation Breakfast Essentials Drink, berries and ice in blender; cover. Blend until smooth.
Combine oats and water in a microwaveable bowl; microwave on high for 1 1/2-2 minutes. Stir and let the mixture cool for a few minutes. Place milk, Carnation Breakfast Essentials(R) powder drink mix, cooled oats and ice in a blender. Cover and blend until smooth. Pour in a tall glass and enjoy!
Place soy milk, Carnation Breakfast Essentials Drink, banana and ice in blender; cover. Blend until smooth.
Place coffee, ice cream and Carnation Breakfast Essentials Drink in blender; cover. Blend until smooth.
Place mango, milk, apple juice, banana, Carnation Breakfast Essentials Drink and ice in blender; cover. Blend until smooth.
Combine coconut water, green tea, banana, spinach, protein powder, and mint in a blender; blend until smooth, 1 to 2 minutes.
Heat a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir oats until toasted and fragrant, about 5 minutes. Add water and cook until water is warm, about 5 minutes. Pour in milk and bring liquid to a boil. Add 1 teaspoon almond flour and saffron and boil until porridge thickens, 2 to 4 minutes. Mix cardamom into porridge and remove from heat. Allow to cool to room temperature or slightly warm, about 5 minutes. Garnish with apple, mango, ground almonds, and raisins.
Grease a saucepan with coconut oil and place over medium heat; add rhubarb. Cook until rhubarb starts to soften, adding water if needed, about 10 minutes. Stir raspberries and 1 packet stevia powder into rhubarb; cook until sauce is smooth, 5 to 10 minutes. Fill a pot halfway with water and bring to a boil; add tapioca. Simmer over medium heat, stirring often, for 1 minute. Reduce heat to low and continue simmering until tapioca is completely translucent, 5 to 8 minutes. Blend coconut milk, dates, maca powder, and vanilla extract in a blender until smooth. Strain tapioca porridge through a fine-mesh strainer and transfer back to the pot over low heat. Stir coconut mixture and 1 packet stevia powder into porridge. Simmer until liquid is absorbed, about 5 minutes more. Pour porridge into 3 wine glasses and top with raspberry-rhubarb sauce.
Bring water to a boil in a saucepan; add millet and cook until half of the water is absorbed, about 15 minutes. Add butternut squash and salt carefully to the millet and simmer until millet and squash are tender, 15 to 20 minutes. Mash the squash using a potato masher until mixture becomes the texture of porridge.
Heat 1/4 cup evaporated milk in a small saucepan until simmering, about 2 minutes. Remove from heat and add chocolate chips; let stand until chocolate melts, 3 to 5 minutes. Whisk in butter, fig jam, and cinnamon until filling is thick and smooth. Whisk pancake mix, 3/4 cup evaporated milk, and egg together in a bowl until no lumps remain. Add water gradually until batter reaches a thin consistency. Stir in vanilla extract. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium-high heat. Spray with cooking spray. Spoon batter into a thin layer at the bottom of the skillet. Cook until set, about 2 minutes. Lift up the sides with a spatula and flip; cook until second side is set, about 1 minute. Transfer to a plate; repeat with remaining batter. Spoon filling into the center of the crepes; fold or roll crepes to enclose filling.
Cook and stir onion, brown sugar, and vinegar in a skillet over medium heat until onion is golden, about 20 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray a 6-muffin tin with cooking spray. Whisk egg whites and eggs in a large measuring cup. Fill each muffin cup halfway with egg mixture. Scatter onion, Gouda cheese, and prosciutto cubes on top. Cover with remaining egg mixture, leaving 1/4-inch space at the top for eggs to rise. Bake in the preheated oven until golden brown on top, about 20 minutes.
Place juice, peaches, banana, yogurt and Carnation Breakfast Essentials Drink in blender; cover. Blend until smooth.
Combine and blend in a blender until liquid. Tons of protein and good for lactose intolerant people like me.
Mix orange juice, water, and cinnamon in a microwave-safe bowl. Heat in the microwave until the mixture registers 110 degrees F (43 degrees C) on an instant-read thermometer, 1 to 2 minutes. Stir yeast into the orange juice mixture. Let stand until yeast is creamy and frothy, about 45 minutes. Combine sugar and margarine in the bowl of a stand mixer. Beat until creamy. Add eggs; beat on high speed for 30 seconds. Mix in yeast mixture and orange zest until well combined. Sift flour, salt, and baking powder together in a bowl. Add gradually to the mixture in the stand mixer, mixing with a bread hook until a soft, sticky dough forms, about 5 minutes. Transfer dough to a large glass bowl. Cover with plastic wrap; let rise in a warm place until doubled in size, 2 to 4 hours. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease 2 round cake pans. Divide dough into 2 equal pieces. Put 1 wrapped coin in each piece; knead for 2 to 3 minutes and shape into a ball. Place 1 ball of dough in each cake pan. Cover with plastic wrap; let rise until puffy, 2 to 4 hours more. Whisk egg white and vanilla together in a small bowl. Brush over the top of dough. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center comes out with a few crumbs attached, 30 to 55 minutes.
Whisk together 2 cups of the pancake & waffle mix along with 1 1/2 cups of water, according to the package's instructions. Stir in the white chocolate chips. Heat a greased pan or grilled to medium heat, when hot pour about 1/3 cup of batter for each pancake. Flip and repeat until the remaining batter is gone. Meanwhile, in a small saucepan, combine the blueberries, raspberries, strawberries, water and sugar. Bring mixture to a boil, then reduce heat to medium-low and simmer for about 10 minutes. Stack pancakes and serve with syrup, berry sauce, sliced fruit, and additional white chocolate chips, if desired.
Place potato on a microwave-safe plate; pierce 3 or 4 times with a fork. Cook in the microwave for 5 minutes. Flip using the fork. Cook for 3 minutes more. Cool potato slightly, about 3 minutes. Cut in halve lengthwise. Spread butter evenly over the potato halves. Top each half with a slice of American cheese and Cheddar cheese. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium-high heat. Break eggs and slide gently into the skillet one at a time. Reduce heat to low; cook eggs until whites are firm and yolks begin to thicken, about 2 minutes. Flip and continue cooking until yolks thicken to desired doneness, 2 to 3 minutes more. Place one egg over each potato half; garnish with green onion and sriracha sauce.
Whisk all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, flax seeds, hemp seeds, baking powder, cinnamon, and salt together in a bowl. Whisk 1/2 cup warm milk, eggs, vegetable oil, and vanilla extract together in a separate bowl. Pour over flour mixture; mix until batter is just combined. Combine 1/4 cup milk, brown sugar, cocoa powder, and butter in a small microwave-safe bowl. Heat in the microwave until butter is melted, 20 to 30 seconds. Stir well until sauce is smooth. Pour half of the sauce into another bowl; set aside. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Grease with cooking spray. Spread a thin layer of batter in the iron using a spatula. Pour some of the chocolate sauce on top. Cover with another layer of batter. Close and cook until golden brown, 3 to 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter. Drizzle reserved chocolate sauce over waffles before serving.
Mix boiling water and ground flax seeds together in a bowl; let sit until thickened, about 10 minutes. Combine flax mixture, soy milk, tofu, and nutritional yeast in a blender; blend on high speed until flax has almost disappeared. Add cornstarch while blender is still running and blend until batter is smooth. Pour batter into a bowl and refrigerate until chilled, about 30 minutes. Pour some of the batter into a shallow bowl or plate. Dip bread, 1 slice at a time, into the batter until evenly coated. Heat oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Cook each dipped bread slice in the hot oil for 5 minutes; flip and cook the other side until lightly browned, 1 to 2 minutes more.
Blend all ingredients in a high-speed blender until smooth and creamy. Pour into drinking glasses and enjoy.
Preheat oven to 250 degrees F (120 degrees C). Combine chocolate chips, oats, almonds, pecans, pumpkin seeds, and coconut in a large bowl. Whisk honey, canola oil, cinnamon, and vanilla extract together in a measuring cup; pour over oat mixture and stir until well coated. Divide oat mixture between 2 large baking sheets. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes. Stir granola and switch position of the sheets. Continue baking until granola is lightly browned, 15 to 30 minutes more. Cool completely, about 15 minutes. Store in a resealable container.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a small loaf pan with cooking spray. Mix ice cream, flour, and sugar together in a bowl; pour into the greased loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, 20 to 25 minutes. Cool bread in the pan for 10 minutes before transferring to a wire rack to cool completely.
Combine coconut water, banana, apple, bok choy, sprouts, coconut, chia seeds, ginger, and spirulina powder in a blender; blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Lightly grease 3-quart oven-safe casserole (8 x 10-inch or similar) with 1/2 tablespoon butter. In large bowl, whisk together egg yolks, buttermilk, cream, 1/3 cup syrup, vanilla and salt; reserve. On ungreased rimmed baking pan, spread waffle pieces in even layer and bake for 12-15 minutes or until crisp and lightly toasted. Increase oven temperature to 375 degrees F. Add waffle pieces and bacon to buttermilk mixture and toss to coat evenly. Pour into prepared casserole and tightly cover with foil. Bake for 45-50 minutes and remove foil. Melt remaining butter and brush over top of casserole and bake, uncovered, for another 10-15 minutes or until top is crisp and toasted. Top with fresh berries and remaining maple syrup, dusting with powdered sugar if desired, and serve warm.
Place potato and carrot in a microwave-safe bowl; heat in microwave until tender, 5 to 10 minutes. Cool until easily handled. Peel potato and dice. Heat olive oil and 1 tablespoon butter in a skillet over medium heat; cook and stir onion and red bell pepper until tender, 5 to 10 minutes. Add potato, carrots, rice, and peas; cook and stir until heated through, about 2 minutes. Stir ketchup into mixture. Whisk eggs, egg whites, milk, salt, and pepper together in a bowl. Heat a non-stick skillet over medium heat; melt 1 1/2 teaspoons butter. Pour 1/2 of the egg mixture into skillet and  cook until set, pulling sides up with a spatula to let uncooked egg run under to cook, about 5 minutes. Spoon 1/2 of the rice mixture onto 1 side of cooked egg and fold egg over; continue to fold egg over until seam is on the bottom. Slide omelet onto a serving plate. Repeat with remaining butter, egg mixture, and rice mixture. Squeeze a curvy line of ketchup down the center of each omelet before serving.
Heat a skillet over medium heat. Stir water and chia seeds together in a bowl; set aside until thickened, about 10 minutes. Add enough hemp milk to thin chia mixture and transfer to a blender; blend until smooth. Combine spelt flour, millet flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a bowl; stir in chia mixture until batter is well mixed. Fold blueberries into batter. Melt butter in hot skillet. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the skillet and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch pie pan. Heat oil in a saucepan over medium-high heat. Saute onions in the hot oil until softened and lightly browned, about 5 minutes. Add celery and cook until soft, about 5 minutes; stir in chicken broth, garlic, parsley, sage, rosemary, and thyme. Simmer broth mixture until it thickens slightly, about 10 minutes. Remove saucepan from heat and pour broth mixture into a bowl. Set it aside to cool, about 10 minutes. Stir eggs and feta cheese into broth mixture; pour into the prepared pan. Bake in the preheated oven until set, 25 to 35 minutes.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Mix oats, peanuts, almonds, coconut flakes, bran, pumpkin, chia, sesame, and sunflower seeds in a large bowl. Place oil, honey, and sugar in a small saucepan over medium heat; heat until boiling. Pour over oat mixture and stir well to combine. Spread muesli out onto baking sheet. Bake muesli in the preheated oven, stirring every 10 minutes, until golden, about 40 minutes total. Remove from oven and cool, about 30 minutes. Stir in golden raisins and store in a sealed container.
Place shredded potatoes in a microwave-safe bowl and microwave for 3 minutes. While potatoes are heating, pour 3 tablespoons vegetable oil into a 12-inch cast-iron or nonstick skillet. Heat the oil over medium to medium-high heat. Remove the potatoes from the microwave and spoon 1 cup of the potatoes into the skillet. Repeat with another cup of potatoes and flatten each mound of potatoes to make a patty. Cook hash browns for 5 minutes. While hash browns are cooking, drain and rinse the beans. Combine beans with a large handful of cilantro, lime juice, cumin, garlic paste, cayenne, and salt in the bowl of a mini food processor. Process until smooth. Set aside. Turn the potato patties over and cook for another 5 minutes, until they are lightly browned. Dice the avocado and slice the green onions. Remove the patties from the pan. Add the remaining 3 tablespoons oil to the pan and repeat with the remaining potatoes. Spread 2 tablespoons of the black bean mixture on each patty and top with romaine, salsa, cheese, avocado, green onions and sour cream (if using).
For the russet pancakes, preheat vegetable oil in a skillet until it reaches 350 degrees F. Grate potatoes and onion, set aside. Place measured amounts into a clean bar towel or cloth. Squeeze out as much moisture as possible. Whisk eggs and whisk in potato starch, salt, and white pepper until smooth. Quickly fold onion and potatoes into the egg mixture. Use a 1/4 cup measuring cup to portion out a potato pancake. Place into hot oil and flatten with a spatula. Fry until golden brown and flip with a slotted spatula (about 4 minutes per side). Fry for an additional time until the second side is golden brown. Use a slotted spatula to remove the pancake to a drain pan or rack. Sprinkle with fine salt. Use the same directions to make the purple potato pancakes using the ingredients listed above.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish with cooking spray. Slice bread rolls horizontally without separating into individual rolls, creating 2 even halves. Whisk eggs in a large, shallow bowl until smooth. Stir in milk, vanilla extract, and cinnamon to make a smooth batter. Dip bottom half of bread rolls into batter, coating both sides, and place in baking dish. Cover bread with sliced bananas. Sprinkle brown sugar and pecans on top. Dot with cubes of butter. Dip top half of bread rolls in batter, coating both sides, and place on top. Bake in the preheated oven until middle is set and top is golden brown, about 25 minutes.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Combine oats, almonds, macadamia nuts, and coconut in a large bowl. Heat olive oil, honey, butter, and brown sugar together in a separate microwave-safe bowl in the microwave until butter is melted, 30 seconds to 1 minute. Whisk butter mixture until brown sugar is dissolved; stir in salt, turmeric, and cinnamon. Pour butter mixture over oat mixture; toss to coat thoroughly. Spread granola evenly on a baking sheet. Bake granola in preheated oven until well-toasted and golden brown, about 30 minutes. Cool on the baking sheet to set, about 15 minutes. Transfer to a large bowl; stir in raisins.
Heat 1/4 cup canola oil in large skillet over medium-high heat; add oats and spelt flakes. Cook, stirring frequently, until toasted, 5 to 7 minutes. Transfer oats mixture to a bowl and remove skillet from heat. Mix honey, 1/2 cup canola oil, and salt together in the skillet; return to heat. Gently pour water into honey mixture and stir; cook until mixture is bubbling, 2 to 3 minutes. Stir oats mixture into honey mixture and cook, stirring frequently, until heated through, about 5 minutes. Remove skillet from heat. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Mix raisins, almonds, flax meal, hemp hearts, hemp seeds, and sunflower seeds into oats mixture; spread onto a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven for 5 minutes. Turn off heat and leave granola in the oven 5 minutes more. Remove baking sheet from oven and cool granola completely before transferring to an airtight container.
Whisk oat flour, buckwheat flour, coconut flour, and flaxseed meal together in a small bowl. Pour in almond milk and kombucha; mix well to form a sticky batter. Set aside to soak in a warm spot in the kitchen, 8 hours to overnight. Blend batter with banana, baking powder, and baking soda until combined. Heat oil in a large skillet or griddle over medium-high heat. Place 1/4 cup of batter in the skillet and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Bring water to a boil in a saucepan; stir in oats and salt. Reduce heat to low and cook oats until tender and water is absorbed, 25 to 30 minutes. Chop kale into 1/4-inch pieces. Heat 1 tablespoon olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add kale; cook and stir until softened and bright green, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to low and cover skillet. Cook until kale is tender, 3 to 4 minutes more. Transfer kale to a plate. Return skillet to medium heat, add remaining oil. Crack egg into the skillet and cook until egg is white on the bottom layer and firm enough to flip, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip egg gently to avoid cracking yolk. Cook egg to desired doneness, 1 to 3 minutes more. Pour oatmeal into serving bowl. Top with kale and egg; season with harissa, salt, and pepper.
Halve and seed papaya. Scoop out a little extra meat to create a bowl shape. Blend 1 banana, acai pulp, and orange juice together in a blender until smooth; divide mixture between papaya bowls and top with granola and remaining 1/2 banana.
Mix Greek yogurt and blackberry jam together in a bowl until spread is smooth; refrigerate.
                                    Watch Now Place potatoes in cheesecloth and wring, extracting as much moisture as possible. Combine potatoes, flour, beaten egg, and salt together in a bowl until thoroughly mixed. Divide potato mixture into 4 equal portions and form into 4-inch patties.
                                    Watch Now Heat canola oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook potato patties in the hot oil until golden brown, about 6 minutes per side. Remove latkes from oil and place on a cooling rack, reserving oil in the skillet.
                                    Watch Now Form breakfast sausage into two 5-ounce patties. Cook patties in the same skillet until browned on the outside and no longer pink in the center, 3 to 5 minutes per side. The internal temperature should be 160 degrees F (73 degrees C). Transfer patties to the cooling rack and top each with Cheddar cheese.
                                    Watch Now Heat a non-stick skillet and add 2 tablespoons reserved heated oil. Crack 2 eggs into heated oil and cook for about 5 minutes.
                                    Watch Now Spread blackberry spread onto 2 of the latkes; top with sausage-Cheddar cheese. Add 1 latke to the Cheddar cheese layer of each, creating a sandwich. Top each sandwich with an egg; season with salt and pepper.
                                    Watch Now
Blend banana, almond milk, 3 blackberries, 4 strawberries, ice cubes, coconut yogurt, and acai powder in a blender until smooth; pour into a bowl. Top mixture with mango, granola, coconut, 3 blackberries, 4 strawberries, blueberries, almond butter, and honey.
Lightly grease a pie pan. Beat applesauce and white sugar together in a bowl. Add oats, soy milk, 1 tablespoon plus 1/4 teaspoon baking powder, vegetable oil, and sea salt; mix well. Fold raisins into oat mixture; pour into prepared pie pan and top with brown sugar and cinnamon. Refrigerate 8 hours to overnight. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake in the preheated oven until oatmeal is firm, 35 to 50 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Press pie crust into a 9-inch deep-dish pie plate. Heat butter in a skillet over medium-high heat; add butter. Cook and stir asparagus in the melted butter, about 2 minutes. Add garlic; cook and stir until asparagus is tender, 2 to 3 minutes more. Remove skillet from heat, adding more butter to asparagus to taste. Season salmon with salt and black pepper; cook with the asparagus over medium heat until fish flakes easily with a fork, about 4 minutes per side. Remove skillet from heat and chop salmon into small pieces. Beat eggs and cream cheese together in a bowl until smooth; add half-and-half and stir. Spoon salmon and asparagus into pie crust and pour in egg mixture, filling almost to the rim. Set pie plate on a baking sheet. Place baking sheet on the lower rack in the preheated oven and cook until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean, 35 to 45 minutes. Let quiche set for 10 minutes before slicing.
Preheat oven to 325 degrees F (165 degrees C). Combine coconut oil and honey together in a saucepan over medium heat; cook and stir until smooth and melted, about 5 minutes. Remove saucepan from heat. Mix oats, coconut, almonds, cranberries, pecans, flax seeds, crystallized ginger, cinnamon, and nutmeg together in a separate bowl. Add coconut oil-honey mixture and stir to coat. Spread oat mixture in 1 even layer on a baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven, stirring every 10 minutes, until granola is dark brown, 20 to 30 minutes. Cool completely.
Blend beet, carrots, and ginger together in a blender until smooth. Add water if mixture is too thick. Add almonds to beet mixture and blend until smooth. Add spirulina and ice and blend until smooth.
Melt coconut oil in a pot over medium heat. Cook and stir onion, tomato, cardamom, coriander, cinnamon, ginger, garlic, cloves, curry powder, chili powder, turmeric, and cumin in hot oil until onions are tender, about 10 minutes. Remove from heat and cool briefly. Pour onion mixture into a food processor; pulse a few times before leaving on to blend. Puree in batches until smooth. Return pureed onion mixture to the same pot; add coconut milk. Season mixture with salt to taste, bring to a boil, reduce heat to low, and simmer until flavors combine, about 5 minutes. Stir in eggs; cook until eggs are heated through, about 5 minutes more.
Beat eggs, coconut milk, 1 1/2 coconut oil, baking powder, and sea salt together in a bowl until smooth. Gradually stir rice flour into the egg mixture until completely incorporated into a batter. Refrigerate batter for at least 1 hour. Melt enough coconut oil in a skillet over medium heat to coat cooking surface completely. Spoon batter into hot skillet to make 4-inch rounds. Cook pancakes until bubbles form on the top, 2 to 3 minutes. Flip cakes and continue cooking until golden on the bottom, about 2 minutes more.
Pass each matzo sheet under cool running water briefly, then crumble into a large bowl. Stir in 1 cup milk, eggs, cinnamon, sugar, and vanilla extract to form evenly moistened batter. Add more milk if batter is too dry. Heat butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Scoop a generous spoonful of dough onto skillet and flatten with a spatula. Cook until golden brown on each side, 3 to 5 minutes per side. Repeat with remaining batter.
Bring water to the boil in a skillet. Add saury, mirin, and soy sauce. Return to a boil and slowly pour in beaten eggs, mixing well. Cook eggs until firm and set, 2 to 3 minutes; garnish with scallion.
Steam or boil vegetables until very tender. Drain if necessary and mash or puree together until you have your desired consistency. Let cool, then place in a sealed container in the fridge until ready to use. Whisk egg. Whisk in 1/4 cup (60 mL) of the pureed or mashed mixed vegetables until well combined. Heat a pan over medium heat. Add egg and vegetable mixture and cook, stirring often, until eggs are scrambled and completely cooked through. Remove from heat, let cool and chop into tiny pieces your baby can manage.
Steam or boil diced apples until very tender, about 30 minutes. Drain if necessary and mash or puree until you have your desired consistency. Let cool, then place in a sealed container in the fridge until ready to use. Meanwhile, place your egg in a small pot and cover with cold water. The water should be about an inch or so higher than the egg. Cover the pot with a lid. Over high heat, bring your egg to a rolling boil. Remove from heat and let stand for 12 minutes. Drain water and immediately run cold water over egg until cooled. Rapid cooling helps prevent a green ring from forming around the yolks. Peel egg and place in a bowl. Mash very well and set aside. Prepare baby rice cereal according to package directions, mixing until you have your desired consistency. Combine mashed egg with 1/4 cup (60 mL) apple puree and 2 Tbsp (30 mL) prepared baby rice cereal in a bowl. Mash together well until you have your desired consistency. Add a little breast milk or formula to thin if you like.
Bring chicken stock to a gentle boil in a large pot over medium heat. Add snapper slices, rice, cherry tomatoes, and gai lan. Simmer until snapper is cooked through, about 5 minutes. Stir in green onions and pak chi farang; season soup with salt. Simmer until flavors combine, about 5 minutes more. Divide soup among 4 bowls to serve.
Combine cooked rice, milk, applesauce, egg, coconut oil, and vanilla in a medium-sized bowl. Whisk until well combined. Combine remaining pancake ingredients and stir into the brown rice mixture until well blended. Heat a large nonstick skillet (sprayed with vegetable spray) over medium heat. Pour batter into skillet, about 1/4 cup per pancake. Flip after 2-3 minutes or when edges start to turn golden and bubbles begin to appear on surface. Cook another 1-2 minutes on second side until golden. Top pancakes with butter mixture and cooked apples, if desired.
Mix flour, tomato juice, milk, sugar, oregano, basil, and black pepper together in a bowl until batter is smooth. Combine ham and Gouda cheese together in a separate bowl. Heat a lightly oiled griddle over medium-high heat. Drop batter, 1 ladle per pancake, onto the griddle and cook until bottom is browned, about 5 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 3 to 4 minutes. Transfer pancake to a serving plate. Sprinkle ham-cheese mixture over pancake. Roll pancake around the filling. Repeat cooking with remaining batter and filling.
Blend all ingredients except ice in blender until smooth. Add ice; blend until thickened. Serve immediately.
Blend all ingredients except ice in blender until smooth. Add ice; blend until thickened. Serve immediately.
Crack egg into a bowl and whisk well. Add breast milk or formula and whisk until well combined. Heat a non-stick skillet over medium heat and add egg mixture. Use a spatula to move egg mixture around in pan to scramble as it cooks. Keep cooking until eggs are completely cooked through. Use spatula to transfer eggs to a plate to cool. Chop into tiny bits and serve to baby.
Steam or boil sweet potato cubes until very tender. Drain if necessary and mash or puree until you have your desired consistency Whisk egg. Whisk in sweet potato puree until well combined. Heat a pan over medium heat. Add egg and sweet potato mixture and cook, stirring often, until cooked through and thickened. Remove from heat, let cool and serve baby!
Whisk together Egg Beaters and Reddi-wip in large shallow dish; set aside. Heat sausage in microwave according to package directions. Meanwhile, spread syrup evenly over bread. Top each of 4 bread slices with 1/4 of the apple and 2 sausage patties. Top with remaining 4 bread slices, syrup-side down, to make sandwiches. Melt 1 tablespoon Parkay in 12-inch nonstick skillet or large griddle over medium heat. Carefully dip 2 sandwiches, 1 at a time, in Egg Beaters mixture, coating both sides. Place in skillet; cook 2 to 3 minutes on each side or until golden brown. Repeat with remaining Parkay, Egg Beaters mixture and sandwiches. Cut each in half to serve. Top with additional syrup, if desired.
Combine flour, oats, sugar, baking powder and salt in large bowl; set aside. Stir together milk, Egg Beaters, yogurt, oil and vanilla in small bowl. Add to flour mixture; stir just until blended. (Do not overmix. Batter still should be slightly lumpy.) Spray griddle with cooking spray. Heat over medium heat until hot or heat electric griddle to 400 degrees F. Pour about 1/4 cup batter onto hot griddle for each pancake. Cook 2 to 3 minutes or until bubbles form on top and bottom is golden brown. Turn and cook side until golden brown. Repeat with remaining batter. Drizzle each serving with 1 tablespoon honey; top with fresh fruit. Serve immediately.
Place milk, Egg Beaters, Fleischmann's, flour, sugar and salt in blender container. Blend until smooth to make crepe batter. Spray 10-inch nonstick skillet generously with cooking spray. Heat over medium heat. Pour about 1/4 cup batter in skillet; immediately tilt skillet to evenly cover bottom of skillet with batter. Cook 2 to 3 minutes on each side or until lightly browned, turning once. Remove crepe from skillet and place on flat work surface. Repeat with remaining batter to make 4 additional crepes. Meanwhile, spread warm crepe with 1/3 of the peanut butter. Place peanut butter-side up on large plate. Top with 1/4 of the banana slices. Spread second crepe with 1 tablespoon hazelnut spread; place spread-side up on top of bananas. Top with another 1/4 of banana slices. Repeat layers with 2 more crepes, another 1/3 of the peanut butter and remaining hazelnut spread and bananas. Spread remaining 1/3 of the peanut butter on the last crepe and place peanut butter-side down on top. Cut into 6 slices with serrated knife. Serve with Reddi-wip.
Combine eggs, spinach and tomato in medium bowl. Spray large nonstick skillet with cooking spray; heat over medium-high heat until hot. Add egg mixture; cook 2 to 4 minutes or until eggs are almost set, stirring occasionally. Sprinkle with salt and pepper, if desired. Divide egg mixture into 4 separate portions in pan. Evenly top with cheese and beef. Remove from heat and cover. Let stand 1 to 2 minutes or until cheese is melted. Place one egg portion on bread bottoms. Close sandwiches; serve immediately.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease 2 9x5-inch loaf pans. Mix coconut sugar and coconut oil together in a bowl; beat in eggs and coconut extract. Sift coconut flour, shredded coconut, salt, baking powder, and baking soda together in a bowl. Stir flour mixture into egg mixture alternately with coconut milk. Add coconut water; stir until soft and pasty. Bake in preheated oven for 15 minutes; cover with aluminum foil. Continue baking until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 35 minutes more. Cool in the pans for 15 minutes before removing to cool completely on a wire rack.
Whisk milk, eggs, and 1 tablespoon vegetable oil together in a bowl until thoroughly combined. Sprinkle in the chestnut flour 1/4 cup at a time, mixing well to avoid lumps, until batter is a liquid consistency. Whisk vigorously; pour through a fine strainer to remove any lumps. Heat cooking oil in an 8-inch crepe pan over medium-high heat. Pour in 1/4 cup of batter; swirl batter around to cover the entire surface. Cook until the edges have browned and are easily loosened with a spatula, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Transfer to a serving plate. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Coat heated waffle iron with cooking spray or butter. Whisk milk, ricotta cheese, and egg together in a large bowl until smooth; stir in pancake mix, coconut oil, 1 tablespoon lemon juice, and vanilla extract. Mix batter until well combined. Combine blueberries, sugar, and 2 teaspoons lemon juice in a small saucepan; bring to a boil. Stir and reduce the heat to low, allowing blueberry sauce to simmer. Pour 1/4 cup batter on the center of the waffle iron and close. Cook until golden brown, about 3 minutes. Pour blueberry sauce over the waffle. Repeat with remaining batter and sauce.
Whip coconut cream in a chilled bowl with an electric mixer until fluffy and doubled in volume, 30 seconds to 1 minute. Combine warm water and green tea powder in a cup; whisk until dissolved. Stir in agave syrup. Stir in soy milk. Spoon whipped coconut cream on top.
Mix all-purpose flour, cricket flour, brown sugar, nutritional yeast, and salt together in a large bowl. Stir water and flaxseed meal together in another bowl. Let stand until thickened, about 5 minutes. Mix in soy milk, almond milk, coconut butter, maple syrup, and vanilla extract. Pour over flour mixture; blend with an electric mixer until batter is smooth. Let batter rest until thickened, at least 1 hour. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Pour 1/4 cup batter into the skillet; swirl skillet to spread batter out in a thin layer. Cook until the top of the crepe looks dry and the bottom is light brown, 1 to 2 minutes. Run a spatula around the edge to loosen crepe; flip crepe and cook until the other side is light brown, about 1 minute more. Repeat with remaining batter.
Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Spray with cooking spray. Mix baking mix, water, heavy cream, egg, soy flour, vegetable oil, polydextrose, sugar substitute, and vanilla extract together in a large bowl until batter is thick. Cook waffles in the preheated iron according to manufacturer's instructions until golden brown, about 5 minutes.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an 8-inch glass baking dish with butter. Spread apples evenly on the bottom of the baking dish. Mix oats, walnuts, and cinnamon together in a bowl. Spread over apples in the baking dish. Combine milk, honey, coconut oil, vanilla extract, and olive oil in another bowl. Pour evenly over oat mixture; do not stir. Bake in the preheated oven until top is golden, 30 to 45 minutes. Cool in the baking dish before serving, about 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place 1 tablespoon butter in a non-stick skillet and add onions. Cook over low heat for thirty minutes until onions develop a light brown color. While onions are cooking, on a lightly floured piece of parchment paper, unfold 1 sheet of pastry and roll into a rectangle, about 10 inches by 12 inches and place on a baking sheet. Lightly brush the entire pastry rectangle with beaten egg. Unfold the other sheet of pastry and cut four 1 inch strips from the longest side. Place each strip along each edge of egg-washed pastry, forming a thicker edge. Discard unused pastry. Lightly brush strips with beaten egg.  Reserve remaining egg. Pierce pastry inside formed edges several times with a fork. Place pastry in the pre-heated oven and bake for 8 minutes, rotate pan and continue baking for another 8 minutes. Remove pastry from oven and allow to cool slightly. In a separate pan, melt 1 tablespoon of butter, add mushrooms, wine, salt and pepper, and cook over medium heat until the mushrooms are tender and most of the liquid is absorbed. While mushrooms are cooking, whisk together the remaining beaten egg, herb cheese and cream until smooth. Carefully spread cheese mixture over pastry. Distribute onions, mushrooms, artichokes and tuna evenly over the cheese mixture. Return to the oven and bake 20 minutes, or until the crust is brown and the cheese mixture is set. Remove from the oven and sprinkle either snipped parsley or snipped chives.  Cut into 9 equal pieces and serve.
Whisk egg. Whisk in mashed banana, breast milk or formula and nutmeg until very well combined. Heat a pan over medium heat. Add egg and banana mixture and cook, stirring often, until eggs are scrambled and completely cooked through. Remove from heat, let cool and chop into tiny pieces that your baby can easily manage.
Steam or boil broccoli florets until very tender. Drain if necessary and mash or puree until you have your desired consistency. Let cool, then place in a sealed container in the fridge until ready to use. Whisk egg. Whisk in 1/4 cup (60 mL) broccoli puree and breast milk or formula until well combined. Heat a pan over medium heat. Add egg and broccoli mixture and cook, stirring often, until eggs are scrambled and completely cooked through. Remove from heat, let cool and chop into tiny pieces that your baby can manage.
Steam or boil diced peaches until very tender. Drain if necessary and mash or puree until you have your desired consistency. Let cool slightly then place in a sealed container in the fridge until ready to use. Place your egg in a small pot and cover with cold water. The water should be about an inch or so higher than the egg. Cover the pot with a lid. Over high heat, bring your egg to a rolling boil. Remove from heat and let stand for 12 minutes. Drain water and immediately run cold water over egg until cooled. Rapid cooling helps prevent a green ring from forming around the yolks. Peel egg and place in a bowl. Mash very well. Combine egg with 1/4 cup (60 mL) pureed peaches and mashed banana. Mash together well until you have your desired consistency. Add a little breast milk or formula to thin if you like.
Steam or boil diced sweet potato until very tender. Drain if necessary and mash or puree until you have your desired consistency. Let cool, then place in a sealed container in the fridge until ready to use. In a medium bowl, whisk together egg, 1 Tbsp (15 mL) sweet potato puree, grated Cheddar, and formula or breast milk until well combined. Heat a small pan over medium heat. Pour egg and sweet potato mixture in and allow it to cook on one side, about 2 to 3 minutes. Use a thin spatula to flip omelette over onto the other side. Continue to cook until set and egg is cooked through completely. If omelette breaks apart while flipping, do not worry as you will be chopping it into pieces anyway! Transfer to a small plate, let cool slightly and chop into tiny pieces that your baby can manage.
Steam or boil diced pears until very tender. Drain if necessary and mash or puree until you have your desired consistency. Let cool, then place in a sealed container in the fridge until ready to use. Prepare baby oatmeal cereal according to package directions, mixing until you have your desired consistency. Whisk egg. Whisk in 1/4 cup (60 mL) of pureed pears and 1 Tbsp (15 mL) prepared baby oatmeal until well combined. Heat a pan over medium heat. Add egg, oatmeal and pear mixture and cook, stirring often, until eggs are scrambled and completely cooked through. Remove from heat, let cool and chop into tiny pieces that your baby can manage.
Blend all ingredients except ice in blender until smooth. Add ice; blend until thickened. Serve immediately.
Combine tea, peach, mango, cucumber, yogurt, ginger, and honey in a blender. Blend until smooth.
Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Grease a baking dish with butter. Spread ham, peas, and corn in the bottom of the baking dish. Whisk eggs and flour together in a large bowl. Pour in 3/4 cup plus 1 1/2 tablespoon cold milk and mix until well-combined. Season with salt and pepper and pour into the baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until center is set and edges are golden, about 30 minutes.
Preheat oven to 300 degrees F (150 degrees C). Toss enoki mushrooms with garlic salt on a large plate. Heat oil in a large skillet or wok. Add enoki mushrooms; cook and stir until firm and lightly browned on the bottom, 2 to 3 minutes. Return to the plate. Add shallot and garlic to the skillet; cook and stir until fragrant, 1 to 2 minutes. Add to mushrooms. Stir turkey into the skillet. Cook, stirring to break up clumps, until browned, about 5 minutes. Combine turkey with mushroom mixture; chop finely. Stir in yellow bell peppers. Beat eggs, Italian seasoning, salt, and pepper together in a large bowl. Stir in turkey mixture and pour into two 1/3-cup muffin tins. Bake in the preheated oven until edges are browned and a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 20 minutes.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease and flour a 9-inch quiche pan. Line the bottom and sides of the quiche pan with puff pastry; prick it all over with a fork. Sprinkle 1 tablespoon Pecorino cheese over the pastry and scatter Brie cheese cubes on top. Place in the refrigerator. Place 6 Romanesco florets in a small bowl; reserve. Coarsely chop remaining florets. Combine chopped florets, remaining 1 tablespoon Pecorino cheese, mascarpone cheese, eggs, 1/3 cup plus 1 1/2 tablespoon milk, and garlic in a food processor; pulse until grainy. Season with salt, pepper, and chile pepper. Spread over the cheese and pastry. Bake in the preheated oven until edges are set, about 25 minutes. Remove from oven and arrange reserved Romanesco florets on top, pressing them in lightly into place. Return to the oven and continue baking until center is set, about 25 minutes more. Let cool slightly before serving, about 10 minutes.
Combine gluten-free flour, cornstarch, sugar, baking soda, and baking powder in a large bowl. Add almond milk, eggs, coconut oil, vanilla extract, and lemon juice; stir until batter is well combined. Spray a griddle lightly with coconut oil; heat over medium-low heat. Drop batter by large spoonfuls onto the griddle and cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Mix ground flax seeds, oat bran, quick-cooking oats, brown rice, raisins, and cinnamon together in a container with a lid. Pour in soy milk; stir to make sure flaxseed mixture is suspended in milk. Cover and refrigerate until oats soften, at least 6 hours. Uncover and stir before serving.
Spray large nonstick skillet or griddle with cooking spray; preheat over medium heat. Stir together syrup and 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon in small saucepan. Heat over very low heat until warmed. Meanwhile, whisk together flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, remaining 1 1/2 teaspoons cinnamon, nutmeg, ginger and cloves in medium bowl; set aside. Whisk together milk, pumpkin, brown sugar, melted butter and egg in large bowl. Whisk flour mixture into pumpkin mixture until well combined. Pour batter 1/4 cup at a time into skillet and cook until golden brown, about 2 to 3 minutes per side. Repeat with remaining batter. Serve immediately with cinnamon syrup and Reddi-wip.
Add sausage and 3 tablespoons water to small non-stick over medium heat. Cover and cook for 3 to 4 minutes, uncover and cook for about 1 minute or until golden brown. Remove from heat and set aside. In a large sauce pan, bring 3 cups water and salt to a boil. Add polenta and 2 tablespoons butter, reduce heat to medium and cook for 5 minutes, stirring slowly as mixture thickens. Stir in sausage, green onion and Italian seasoning; mix well. Transfer polenta to medium size cookie sheet; spread out evenly, ensuring onions and sausage are well distributed throughout. Let polenta cool and set for 15 to 20 minutes. After polenta has set cut 14 rounds using 2 1/2-inch round cookie cutter. Add 1 to 2 tablespoons of vegetable oil to a non-stick skillet. Pan fry polenta rounds on medium-high for 2 to 3 minutes on each side or until light golden brown. Beat eggs, 2 1/2 tablespoons water, tomato, cheese, parsley salt and pepper in bowl until blended. Heat remaining butter in 10-inch nonstick skillet over medium-high heat; pour in egg mixture. Push cooked egg portions from edges of skillet towards the center. Continue to cook, tilting skillet, until eggs are cooked through, do not flip or fold eggs over.  Remove from skillet and cut with 2 1/2-inch round cookie cutter into 7 rounds. To assemble sliders, top one polenta round with an egg round, lettuce and second polenta round.
In a food processor, combine basil, peas, garlic, salt, pepper, and extra virgin olive oil. Process until smooth and blended. Toast bread in oven (350 degrees F) or toaster for about 3-4 minutes. In a small non-stick saute pan, over medium heat, break Eggland's Best egg onto surface, carefully. Fry until transparent membrane turns to white, and yolk is cooked. Remove and repeat for each egg. Spread about one tablespoon of pesto atop each piece of toast. Gently lay each egg atop the pesto. Sprinkle with extra salt, pepper, and extra virgin olive oil (optional).
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish with butter. Combine sausage, pumpkin, onion, and sun-dried tomatoes in a large skillet over medium heat; cook and stir until sausage is browned, 5 to 8 minutes. Transfer sausage mixture to a large bowl. Mix in bread, heavy cream, Cheddar cheese, eggs, milk, Gruyere cheese, salt, and pepper. Spread mixture in the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until puffed and golden, 30 to 45 minutes.
Mix 1 cup brown sugar and kosher salt together in a small bowl. Spread a thin layer of the brown sugar mixture in the bottom of a 9-inch baking pan. Arrange 2 to 3 salmon fillets on top; cover with some of the brown sugar mixture. Repeat layers until all the salmon fillets are coated. Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Preheat a smoker to 195 degrees F (91 degrees C) according to manufacturer's instructions. Rinse brown sugar mixture off salmon fillets. Brush fillets lightly with honey and sprinkle remaining 1/2 cup brown sugar on top. Pour cola-flavored beverage into the smoker's water pan; add water to within 1 inch of the top. Place half of the wood chips around the perimeter of the hot charcoal. Place salmon on the cooking racks. Cook salmon, adding more wood chips if needed, until an instant-read thermometer inserted into the center reads 145 degrees F (63 degrees C), about 2 hours. Cool before serving, at least 15 minutes.
Place egg whites, coconut milk, honey, vanilla extract, and cinnamon in a bowl; blend with an electric hand mixer until mixture is light and fluffy, 2 to 3 minutes. Add tapioca flour, baking soda, and baking powder. Mix with hand mixer just to combine, about 1 minute. Fold in coconut flour by hand using a spatula (do not over mix). Heat skillet over medium heat; spray with non-stick cooking spray. Pour batter in 1/4-cup portions in batches on the hot skillet. Cook on one side until small bubbles form in the center of the pancakes and edges look dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip them over and cook the other side until lightly browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Transfer pancakes to a baking rack; keep warm.
Beat eggs in large bowl; cook in skillet until scrambled. Mix in can of diced green chilies and set aside. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. In large bowl mix together enchilada sauce and half-and-half until well combined. Lightly coat bottom of large casserole dish with small amount of sauce. To assemble enchiladas fill each tortilla with eggs, a small handful of Cheddar cheese, and about 2 tablespoons of Canadian Bacon. Roll and place seam side down in casserole dish. Repeat with remaining ingredients. Pour green chili sauce over tortillas. Sprinkle with Monterey Jack cheese. Cover with foil and bake for 20-25 minutes until sauce is bubbling and enchiladas are heated through. Let set for 5 minutes before serving. Serve with sour cream and salsa if desired. To Make Ahead: Cover with foil and place in fridge or freezer. If frozen, let thaw in fridge before baking. Increase baking time by 5-10 minutes if starting with cold enchiladas.
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F. Heat oil in 10-inch, nonstick skillet over medium heat. Add mushrooms and peppers and cook until tender, about 10 minutes. Remove from heat and stir in green onions and chicken sausage. Divide sausage mixture equally between 4 oven safe ramekins. Crack 1 egg into center of each cup. Transfer cups to rimmed baking sheet. Bake until egg whites are almost set, about 15 minutes. Season with salt and pepper before serving.
Bring water to a boil in a saucepan. Add quinoa, raisins, golden raisins, and rum; reduce heat and simmer, covered, until water is absorbed, about 10 minutes. Remove from heat and keep covered, about 5 minutes. Fluff quinoa mixture with a fork and stir in cinnamon. Ladle into 6 serving bowls; top each with 1 tablespoon maple syrup.
Place a steamer insert into a saucepan and fill with water to just below the bottom of the steamer. Bring water to a boil. Add pumpkin, cover, and steam until fully cooked, 35 to 45 minutes. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9x5-inch loaf pan with olive oil. Place chia seeds in a blender; add hot water and let sit for 5 minutes. Scoop flesh out of pumpkin halves and add to blender. Add crystallized sugar cane juice and agave nectar to blender; blend until pumpkin mixture is very smooth. Mix spelt flour, brown rice flour, baking powder, cinnamon, salt, nutmeg, allspice, and cloves together in a bowl. Fold pumpkin mixture and walnuts into flour mixture until batter is just mixed; spoon into the prepared loaf pan. Bake in the preheated oven until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean, 1 to 1 1/2 hours.
Heat a cast iron skillet over medium heat. Cook sausage patties until golden brown, about 3 minutes per side. Transfer to 3 serving plates. Bring 3 or 4 cups of salted water to a boil in a large pot. Add potatoes and green onions; cook for 1 to 2 minutes. Drain and cool under running water. Combine potatoes, green onions, mushrooms, quick-mixing flour, garlic powder, pepper, and sea salt in a bowl; mix well by hand. Blend in goat cheese with your fingers. Melt butter in the skillet over medium-high heat. Drop potato mixture into the skillet in 3 portions. Flatten into 3-inch pancakes with spoon or spatula. Cook until browned and slightly crusted, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Place on top of sausage patties. Fill a large saucepan with 2 to 3 inches of water and bring to a boil. Reduce heat to bring water to a gentle simmer; add vinegar. Crack 1 egg into a small bowl. Gently slip into the simmering water, holding the bowl just above the surface of the water. Repeat with remaining eggs. Cook eggs until the whites are firm and the yolks have thickened, 2 1/2 to 3 minutes. Remove the eggs from the water with a slotted spoon, dab on a kitchen towel to remove excess water, and place on top of pancakes.
Place all ingredients into blender and blend on high until smooth.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch baking dish with 1 teaspoon butter. Melt 1 tablespoon butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Add sausage, onion, and mushrooms; cook and stir until onion is translucent, about 5 minutes. Add spinach and garlic; cook and stir until spinach is wilted, about 2 minutes. Season with 1/2 teaspoon salt. Combine remaining 7 tablespoons butter and water in a large saucepan; bring to a boil. Add potatoes and cook until fork-tender, about 10 minutes. Drain. Whisk eggs, sour cream, and parsley together in a large bowl. Fold in sausage mixture, potatoes, and Cheddar cheese. Season with 1/2 teaspoon salt and black pepper. Turn out into the prepared baking dish. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, about 20 minutes. Scatter goat cheese on top. Slice into 9 pieces.
Place all ingredients into blender and blend on high until smooth.
In 10-inch skillet, simmer tomatoes for 5 minutes. With potato masher or back of spoon, crush tomatoes. Add BUSH'S(R) Sriracha Beans and bring up to a simmer. Using back of spoon or bottom of mug, make four wells in bean mixture and crack eggs into individual wells. Cover and cook until egg whites are set, and yolks are still runny, about 5-8 minutes. To serve, plate each egg and top with queso fresco. Serve with tortillas or on top of tostadas.
Spray an 8x8-inch glass baking pan with cooking spray. Place cashews in a food processor; grind until the consistency of flour. Combine ground cashews, rice cereal, sunflower seeds, nut butter, agave, oats, and flaxseed meal in the bowl of a stand mixer; blend until smooth. Press cashew mixture firmly into the prepared baking pan with a spatula. Melt chocolate in a microwave-safe glass or ceramic bowl in 15-second intervals, stirring after each melting, 1 to 3 minutes. Spread over cashew mixture. Chill in the refrigerator until set, about 5 minutes. Cut into 1-inch squares.
Combine strawberries, apriplums, yogurt, coconut, flax seed in a blender. Pour in milk; pulse until smooth.
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Line a large rimmed baking sheet with aluminum foil; grease with cooking spray. Mix oats, almonds, hemp seeds, and flaxseed meal together in a large bowl. Whisk honey, water, flaxseed oil, vanilla extract, and almond extract together in a bowl until blended. Pour over oat mixture and stir quickly until distributed. Spread evenly on the prepared baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven, stirring every 3 to 5 minutes, until oats are golden and nuts appear toasted, 15 to 20 minutes. Let cool completely, about 20 minutes.
Bring 2 cups water to a boil in a saucepan. Add wheat berries. Cover and remove from heat. Let soak, 6 hours to overnight. Drain. Combine soaked wheat berries with remaining 4 cups water; bring to a boil. Simmer over medium heat for 10 to 15 minutes. Remove from heat; let stand until berries pop open, 10 to 15 minutes more. Divide wheat berries among serving bowls. Add a few spoonfuls of hot milk, a handful of almonds, and a sprinkle of cinnamon to each bowl before serving.
Combine water, salt, and rhubarb in a saucepan; bring to a boil. Add oats and cinnamon. Reduce heat to low; cover and cook, stirring occasionally, 5 to 8 minutes. Remove from heat; stir in flaxseed meal, honey, coconut oil, and chia seeds.
Cut red potato into spirals using a spiralizer. Dip into a bowl of cold water; rinse and transfer to a microwave-safe bowl. Cook potato spirals in the microwave on high for 1 minute. Blot with paper towels to remove any moisture. Remove sausage from its casing and shape into 2 balls; press into round discs. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Add 2 round piles of potato spirals. Season with salt and pepper. Top each pile with a sausage disc and press down firmly with a spatula to make thin patties. Cook until well browned, about 4 minutes per side. Garnish with chives.
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch glass pie pan with cooking spray. Grate cauliflower coarsely with a box grater. Measure out 1 1/2 cup of cauliflower "rice"; press into the bottom and sides of the pan to make a crust. Bake in the preheated oven until crust looks dry, about 15 minutes. Melt coconut oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add onion and bell pepper; cook and stir until softened, about 10 minutes. Add mushrooms and butter; cook and stir until mushrooms are lightly browned, about 5 minutes. Stir in 3 slices bacon. Season with salt and pepper. Whisk eggs in a bowl until blended. Whisk in sour cream until smooth. Stir in onion mixture and 1 cup Cheddar cheese. Sprinkle 1/4 cup Cheddar cheese over the cauliflower crust. Spread egg mixture evenly over the cheese. Top with remaining 1/4 cup Cheddar cheese. Sprinkle remaining 3 slices bacon on top. Bake in the preheated oven until a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, about 40 minutes. Remove from oven and let stand until set, 5 to 10 minutes.
Melt 2 tablespoons butter in non-stick skillet. Add shallot and saute for one minute. Add peppers and cook until softened, about 5 minutes. While peppers are cooking, crack eggs into bowl and whisk with milk. Stir in ham and peas. Add last tablespoon of butter to peppers. Pour eggs into skillet with peppers and cook for 10 seconds before stirring. Season with salt and freshly ground black pepper. Cook eggs over medium heat until done, about 2 minutes. Turn off heat and put eggs, peas and pepper mixture onto mini sub roll.
Place eggplant on paper towels; cover with coarse salt. Let sit until moisture is drawn out, about 1 hour. Rinse with cold water; dry thoroughly with paper towels. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease a 9-inch round cake pan with cooking spray. Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add eggplant; cook and stir until eggplant is tender and lightly brown, about 5 minutes. Drain on paper towels. Cover the bottom of the prepared baking pan with half of the eggplant; layer on ham, mozzarella cheese, and basil. Top with remaining eggplant. Whisk eggs, Parmesan cheese, salt, and pepper together in a bowl; pour over the top eggplant layer. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set and top is golden, about 30 minutes. Cool slightly, about 10 minutes. Flip the pan onto a plate to remove the quiche.
Melt the butter in a large skillet over medium-high heat until starting to brown. Add the sugar, apple slices and salt and cook, stirring frequently, until apples are softened and tender, about 6 to 9 minutes. Put one warm waffle each on a plate, top each with yogurt and apples. Serve warm.
Combine buckwheat, chia seeds, 1 1/2 teaspoons coconut, flax seed meal, cinnamon, and vanilla powder in a jar; stir until well mixed. Stir in milk; cover. Place in the refrigerator, 8 hours to overnight. Stir buckwheat mixture. Heat in the microwave for 30 seconds. Stir in mixed berries, remaining coconut, and agave.
Combine soy milk, oil, vinegar, and vanilla extract in a large bowl. Let sit until milk starts to curdle, about 5 minutes. Combine flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt in a separate bowl. Make a well in the center of the dry ingredients and add the soy milk mixture. Whisk together until smooth. Heat a greased frying pan over medium heat. Fry pancakes until edges are brown and bubbles form in the center, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook about 3 minutes more.
Place oats in a blender and blend into a fine powder. Add almond milk, almond flour, banana, sugar, vanilla extract, cinnamon, baking powder, and salt; blend until well mixed. Let batter sit until thickened, about 10 minutes. Heat a skillet over medium-high heat and coat with cooking spray. Drop 1/4 cup batter onto the hot skillet and cook until bubbles form and edges are dry, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Cut the top off the English muffin, using the muffin as the base for the Croque Madame. Place three slices of avocado on each muffin base, then place the Dietz & Watson Swiss Cheese on top. Place the Dietz & Watson Maple Honey Ham on top of that. Prepare a pot for the eggs. Fill a shallow saucepan with three inches of water and bring it to a simmer. Crack 1 egg into the saucepan and add distilled white vinegar to the water. Turn down the heat until the bubbles disappear. Use a wooden spoon to make the water swirl, keeping egg at the center of the whirlpool. Cook for 3 minutes and remove with a slotted spoon. The yolk should wiggle, but shouldn't be too loose. Repeat with the second egg. Place eggs over the ham. Poke eggs a little bit to allow the yolk to run down each muffin.
Combine flour, sugar, baking soda, and soda in a large mixing bowl. Pour in molasses and stir until partially incorporated. Combine water, coconut oil, vinegar, and vanilla extract in a medium mixing bowl. Preheat waffle iron on medium according to manufacturers' instructions. Grease both sides of the waffle iron. Pour water mixture over flour mixture and stir thoroughly. Add chocolate chips. Ladle 1/4 cup batter into the waffle iron. Close and cook until browned on the outside, 2 to 3 minutes per waffle. Take out each waffle with a fork and place on a serving platter.
Whisk flour, sugar, baking soda, salt, and cinnamon together in a large bowl. Mash banana in another bowl. Stir in sourdough starter, sour cream, egg, 2 tablespoons butter, and vanilla extract. Add to the flour mixture and stir until just combined. Mix in milk gradually until batter is pourable but some lumps remain. Heat a griddle over medium-high heat. Grease lightly with melted butter. Pour 1/4 cup batter onto the griddle for each pancake, keeping them 2 inches apart. Cook until bubbles form and the edges are dry, about 2 1/2 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, about 1 minute. Repeat with remaining butter and batter.
Break sausage apart in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook until starting to brown, 3 to 5 minutes. Add Worcestershire sauce to the mix and let it heat up before adding beef bouillon and nutmeg. Stir and cook sausage until no longer pink, 3 to 5 minutes more. Reduce heat to medium low and sprinkle in flour gradually. Cook, stirring constantly, until flour coats the sausage and is completely absorbed. Cook for 1 to 2 minutes more. Pour in almond milk gradually, stirring constantly until gravy starts to thicken, up to 12 minutes. Add a little more almond milk if too thick. Season with salt and pepper. Continue stirring vigorously until gravy reaches desired thickness. Remove from heat and let cool. Taste and adjust seasoning as desired.
Combine flour, baking powder, pumpkin pie spice, and salt in a bowl. Stir milk, brown sugar, pumpkin puree, vanilla extract, oil, and water together in a second bowl; mix thoroughly. Make a well in the flour mixture, add milk mixture, and mix until evenly combined. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium-high heat. Drop 1/4 cup pancake batter onto the hot skillet and cook until bubbles form and edges are dry, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip and cook until browned on the other side, 3 to 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter.
Pour tomatoes into a blender and puree until smooth. Place a deep pan over medium heat and add oil, red bell pepper, onion, and garlic. Saute until the vegetables begin to sweat out their juices, 1 to 2 minutes. Add salt, black pepper, and cumin. Pour pureed tomatoes into the pan. Add water and bring to a simmer, about 5 minutes. Crack eggs into individual cups and slide gently into the simmering sauce leaving space in between. Cover the pan and cook until eggs reach the desired doneness, 3 to 7 minutes. Heat tortillas in a microwave oven, about 15 seconds. Place 2 warmed tortillas on each plate. Use a slotted spoon to carefully extract eggs, placing 2 on top of the tortillas on each plate. Cover eggs with remaining sauce.
Melt butter in a cast-iron skillet over low heat. Add prosciutto and cook until crisp, 3 to 5 minutes. Beat eggs and cream in a cup and pour into the skillet. Cook over low heat while stirring until eggs start to set and get creamy, about 10 minutes. Stir in Parmesan cheese and cook and stir for 2 to 3 minutes. Mix in pesto and season with salt and pepper. Serve immediately.
Melt butter in a large skillet over medium-low heat and cook onion until soft and translucent, about 5 minutes. Add rice vinegar. Beat eggs in a large bowl and mix in milk and pesto. Season with salt and pepper. Pour into skillet; cook and stir for 3 to 5 minutes. Add salmon and keep stirring until eggs start to set on the edges of the skillet, 5 to 8 minutes. Sprinkle with Parmesan cheese; cook and stir until eggs are scrambled to your desired consistency.
Defrost banana chunks for 5 minutes. Combine banana and 1 cup strawberries in a blender; blend until smooth. Pour into a bowl. Top with coconut flakes, chia seeds, fresh banana slices, strawberry pieces, and blueberries.
Preheat the oven to 200 degrees F (95 degrees C). Line a rimmed baking sheet with parchment paper. Melt butter in a small saucepan over low heat. Add maple syrup, molasses, pumpkin puree, apple juice, pumpkin spice, and vanilla extract; whisk until blended and warmed through. Combine pecans, oats, cranberries, dates, hazelnuts, pistachios, and pumpkin seeds in a large mixing bowl. Pour in maple syrup mixture and toss to combine. Spread mixture onto the baking sheet. Bake in the preheated oven until granola looks dry, 3 to 4 hours. Allow to cool until crisp. Crumble into bite-sized pieces and transfer to a covered container.
Mix almond meal, pecans, and baking powder together in a large bowl. Whisk heavy cream, eggs, ghee, and vanilla paste together in a separate bowl. Heat a waffle iron to medium-high according to manufacturer's instructions. Mix almond meal mixture and cream mixture together. Let batter rest until thickened, about 5 minutes. Stir batter and cook in the preheated iron according to manufacturer's instructions.
Preheat a convection oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Grease an ovenproof baking dish with butter. Break eggs into a bowl. Add milk, 1 pinch Italian herb seasoning, salt, black pepper, and chipotle hot pepper sauce and mix with a whisk. Pour into the prepared baking dish. Tear mozzarella cheese into pieces and place on top of egg mixture in an even layer. Place bacon slices on top of cheese in an even layer. Roll pizza dough out halfway. Stretch dough over sides of baking dish firmly, allowing about 1/4-inch extra on each side. Use kitchen scissors to trim away any extra dough. Pour olive oil in a small bowl and add remaining Italian seasoning and garlic powder. Pour mixture over dough. Top dough with shredded mozzarella cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until dough is golden and cheese is nicely crisped, 15 to 20 minutes.
Heat oil in a saute pan over medium heat. Cook turkey breast, flipping every few minutes, until nicely browned on the outside and no longer pink in the center, about 15 minutes. Set aside to cool. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Melt butter in a clean saute pan over medium heat. Add mushrooms, onion, and jalapeno peppers. Cook until onion is translucent, about 5 minutes. Combine 1 cup all-purpose flour, whole wheat flour, and salt in a bowl. Cut in the lard until mixture is crumbly. Add iced water, a spoonful at time, stirring with a fork until dough comes together in a ball. Roll dough out onto a lightly floured surface and shape it into 9-inch circle; transfer to a pie plate. Bake crust in the preheated oven until edges are lightly browned, about 10 minutes. Spread onion-mushroom mixture over the bottom of the crust. Layer farmer's cheese on top. Cut turkey breast into small chunks and scatter over the cheese. Whisk remaining 1/2 cup all-purpose flour with eggs, milk, and baking powder until smooth. Pour over the filling. Bake until lightly browned on top and crust bounces back when lightly touched, 35 to 40 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Press sweet potatoes into the bottom of a 9-inch pie dish. Pour melted butter over potatoes. Bake in the preheated oven until golden and firm, about 20 minutes. Whisk, eggs, milk, salt, and pepper together in a small bowl. Spread turkey, Cheddar cheese, and onion over the sweet potato crust. Cover with the whisked egg mixture. Place quiche in the oven and reduce temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Bake until top is beginning to brown, 20 to 25 minutes.
Dissolve yeast in warm water. Add sugar to activate yeast. Add bread flour; sprinkle salt on top. Pour in raisins and figs; mix well. Knead dough for about 10 minutes. Place in a large glass bowl and cover with plastic wrap. Let rise for 3 to 4 hours. Turn dough out onto a floured surface. Pick up the side of the dough that's farthest from you and fold it inward, about 3/4 of the way across. Fold the last quarter of the dough all the way back over the far side, creating batard, or torpedo, shape. Press down on the seam with the side of your palm to seal it. Preheat the oven to 475 degrees F (245 degrees C). Sprinkle some cornmeal over the dough and cover loosely; let proof for 45 minutes. Sprinkle more cornmeal onto a baking sheet; flip dough onto the sheet so the seam side faces up. Use a scoring tool or serrated knife to cut a few slashes into the top of the dough. Bake in the preheated oven until top is golden brown and bottom sounds hollow when tapped, about 20 minutes. Let the loaf cool for at least 30 minutes, as it will continue to cook when it comes out of the oven.
Melt butter in a small pan over medium heat. Saute pear, walnuts, and 1/4 teaspoon cinnamon until pear softens, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat and let cool. Combine protein drink and oats in a small Mason jar. Mix in cooled pear and walnuts. Seal and refrigerate, 8 hours to overnight. Add pumpkin spice, ginger, and remaining cinnamon to the oats the following morning. Stir to combine.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Spray two 12-cup muffin tins with cooking spray. Combine olives, mushrooms, spinach, and onions in a mixing bowl. Add turmeric, paprika, and ginger. Add eggs and mix until combined. Fold in Cheddar cheese and bacon bits. Pour mixture into the muffin tins. Bake in the preheated oven until eggs are set and cheese is lightly crisp, 22 to 26 minutes. Let cool.
Bring water to a boil in a large pot. Remove from heat and stir in maple syrup, coffee, and vanilla extract. Let cool briefly, then refrigerate 8 hours to overnight. Stir in heavy cream and serve in a punch bowl with lots of ice.
Place a skillet over medium heat and add butter. Break eggs into a bowl, add mushrooms, and whisk together vigorously. Reserve about 2 tablespoons green onions. Pour eggs into the hot butter in the skillet and scramble to create soft, fluffy curds. Add remaining green onions, salt, and pepper while scrambling to desired doneness, 3 to 5 minutes, being careful not to overcook. Garnish with reserved green onions.
Place matcha powder in a bowl and slowly add boiling water while whisking continuously until tea is frothy and matcha is fully incorporated. Refrigerate or set aside to cool. Mix milk, melted butter, and vanilla extract together in a large mixing bowl. Beat egg into the wet ingredients. Mix flour, sugar, salt, and baking soda together in a bowl. Sift into another bowl. Whisk cooled tea mixture into the milk mixture. Add sifted flour mixture to the milk mixture and mix batter thoroughly. Heat a lightly buttered frying pan or griddle over medium heat, but do not let it smoke. Pour 1/4 cup batter into the pan and cook until small bubbles are visible near the center of the pancake, 1 to 3 minutes. Flip and cook on the second side 1 to 3 minutes more.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Heat a nonstick pan over medium heat. Add oil, onion, curry leaves, mustard seeds, fennel seeds, cumin seeds, salt, and black pepper. Cook for 5 minutes. Add jalapeno and bell pepper and cook for 2 minutes more. Add potatoes and cook for another 10 minutes. Transfer mixture to a large glass casserole dish. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes. Meanwhile, combine tofu, turmeric, black pepper, onion powder, and garlic powder in the same nonstick pan over medium heat. Break tofu into scrambled egg consistency and cook for 5 minutes. Add nutritional yeast and cook over low heat for about 1 minute more. Remove from heat and add cilantro. Remove casserole dish from the oven and add tofu mixture; stir to combine and return to the hot oven. Continue baking for 10 minutes more. Let rest 5 minutes before serving.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Place potatoes into a large pot and cover with salted water; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low and simmer until parboiled, about 5 minutes. Drain and transfer potatoes to a baking sheet. Coat liberally with olive oil and season with herbes de Provence, sage, sea salt, and black pepper. Roast in the preheated oven until tender, turning once, about 25 minutes. Meanwhile, place tofu onto a plate and place another plate on top. Set a 3- to 5-pound weight on top. Press tofu for 20 to 30 minutes; drain and discard the accumulated liquid. Cut tofu into small dice. Heat olive oil in a pan over medium-high heat. Add garlic and saute until golden, about 1 minute. Add mushrooms and cook until softened, 3 to 5 minutes more. Add zucchini and a sprinkling of sea salt; keep cooking for about 3 minutes more. Add diced pressed tofu, scallions, lemon oil, rice vinegar, soy sauce, pear vinegar, and ginger to the pan with the vegetables. Stir in fennel seeds, curry powder, turmeric, sea salt, Chinese 5-spice powder, and ground pink pepper. Reduce heat to low and cook until flavors combine, 3 to 5 minutes more.
Put chicken tenders in a zip-top bag and pour in buttermilk. Refrigerate for 2 hours or up to 4 hours. Allow chicken to reach room temperature before cooking. Stir maple syrup, butter, and sriracha sauce together to create the condiment. Set aside. Place 1 cup white rice flour in a bowl. Whisk eggs together in a shallow dish. Mix corn flakes, bread crumbs, Creole seasoning, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and pepper together in another shallow dish. Drain chicken and discard buttermilk. Dredge a chicken tender in the bowl of white rice flour, shaking off any excess. Dip into beaten egg. Lift up so excess egg drips back in the bowl. Press into bread crumb mixture to coat both sides. Place the breaded tender onto a plate. Continue process with the remaining chicken tenders. Run the tenders through the egg wash and dredge through the crumb mixture a second time. Tap and allow excess to fall off. Heat a large skillet over medium heat. Cook bacon until slightly crispy and fat is rendered, about 4 minutes per side. Let bacon drain on a wire rack over paper towels. Increase heat to medium-high. Add vegetable oil to the bacon grease and heat to between 350 to 375 degrees F (175 to 190 degrees C). Fry tenders in the hot oil until no longer pink in the center and the juices run clear, 6 to 8 minutes. An instant-read thermometer inserted into the center should read at least 165 degrees F (74 degrees C). Place chicken on the rack with the bacon. Preheat a waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions. Whisk egg whites and cream of tartar on medium high speed in the bowl of a stand mixer until stiff peaks form. Sift brown rice flour, 1/2 cup white rice flour, cornstarch, baking powder, powdered milk, and a pinch of salt together in a mixing bowl twice. Make a well in the center. Pour in milk, honey, oil, and vanilla extract while lightly stirring. Do not overmix. Fold in egg whites until just combined; leaving pillows of egg whites will create fluffy pockets in the waffles. Cook batter in the waffle iron according to manufacturer's instructions, or until waffle is golden brown and the iron stops steaming, about 5 minutes. Repeat with remaining batter to make 6 waffles. This batter will make 7 total; you can freeze the remaining waffle if desired. Heat maple syrup sauce in the microwave for 1 minute. Place waffles on serving plates. Top each with 3 slices of bacon. Divide chicken between the waffles and top with sauce.
Mix cauliflower, ham, egg, Cheddar cheese, flour, green onions, oil, and pepper together in a large bowl until evenly combined. Set waffle iron to the highest heat setting and spray both griddles with nonstick spray. Spoon 1 cup of the cauliflower mixture into the center of the waffle iron. Keep the rest of the batter refrigerated. Close lid and cook for 10 minutes. Gently remove the waffle using a spatula and fork. Cook remaining batter.
Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F (200 degrees C). Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add cabbage and cook for about 18 minutes. Stir in butter and season with salt. Continue cooking until cabbage is soft, about 2 minutes more. Roll puff pastry out on a lightly floured surface into a large square. Place into a springform pan, allowing the corners to hang over the sides. Beat egg and water together in a bowl and stir in Swiss cheese. Pour cooked cabbage into the pastry-lined pan and cover with egg mixture. Fold pastry corners over filling and punch together in the middle. Bake in the preheated oven until pastry is golden brown, about 25 minutes.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Line a springform pan with parchment paper. Roll out puff pastry on a lightly floured surface. Line the prepared springform pan with puff pastry and pierce all over with a fork. Add another piece of parchment paper and cover with a layer of dried beans to keep pastry flat while baking. Prebake pastry in the preheated oven for 10 minutes. Remove from oven. Spread puff pastry with a thin layer of mustard. Place tuna into a bowl and mix with mayonnaise. Season with salt and pepper. Spread mixture onto puff pastry crust. Combine creme fraiche and eggs in a separate bowl. Stir in Swiss cheese and season with salt and pepper. Pour over tuna mixture and cover with tomato slices. Bake in the preheated oven until filling has set and pastry is golden brown, 20 to 30 minutes. Sprinkle with dill before serving.
Slowly pour rose into a chilled glass pitcher, holding bottle at an angle to help preserve the carbonation. Add an equal amount of apricot mango juice. Serve in chilled Champagne flutes.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch glass baking dish. Heat a large nonstick skillet over medium heat. Cook sweet potatoes, stirring occasionally, until soft, 10 to 15 minutes. Transfer to a large bowl. Add sausage to the skillet; cook and stir until browned and crumbly, about 10 minutes. Add onion, jalapeno, and garlic and cook 3 minutes more. Transfer mixture to the bowl with the sweet potatoes and add tomatoes. Stir and spread into the prepared baking dish. Whisk eggs, milk, cream, 1 1/2 cups Cheddar cheese, and salt together in a bowl. Pour over mixture in the baking dish. Sprinkle remaining Cheddar cheese on top. Bake in the preheated oven until top is golden brown and knife inserted in the center comes out clean, 30 to 45 minutes. Let stand 5 minutes before serving.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Grease a 9x13-inch casserole dish. Cook and stir sausage and onion in a skillet until browned, about 5 minutes. Drain excess grease. Arrange sweet potato fries in the casserole dish in a single layer. Layer spinach, mushrooms, and sausage mixture on top. Whisk eggs together in a bowl. Season with seasoning salt and pour into the casserole. Cover with Cheddar cheese. Bake in the preheated oven, uncovered, until set, about 35 minutes. Let rest for at least 5 minutes before cutting and serving.
Preheat the oven to 200 degrees F (95 degrees C). Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook and stir sausage in the hot skillet until browned and crumbly, 5 to 7 minutes. Transfer sausage to a bowl and set aside. Add oil to the skillet and heat over medium heat. Add bell pepper and onion; season with salt and pepper and cook until softened, 3 to 5 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Add sweet potatoes to the hot skillet. Season with salt and black pepper; cook and stir frequently for 5 minutes. Cover skillet and cook 5 minutes more. Remove lid and cook until potatoes are browned, stirring frequently, 5 to 7 minutes more. Set aside. Whisk eggs, milk, 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese, garlic powder, dry mustard, salt, and black pepper together in a bowl. Heat a nonstick pan over medium heat. Add egg mixture and scramble until nearly done but still a bit wet, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat. Layer sweet potatoes in the bottom of a 9x13-inch baking pan. Pour in scrambled eggs, 1/2 cup Cheddar cheese, onion-pepper mixture, and sausage, in that order. Top with remaining cheese. Bake in the preheated oven until warmed through, about 10 minutes or until ready to serve.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Line a large cookie sheet with parchment paper. Blend flour, baking powder, ginger, and baking soda together in a small bowl. Set aside. Mix brown sugar and butter in another bowl to form a smooth paste. Add eggs; beat with an electric mixer on medium speed until creamy. Add flour mixture; beat until a smooth dough forms. Stir in granola, coconut, and chocolate chips. Drop teaspoonfuls of dough 2 inches apart onto the cookie sheet. Bake until lightly browned on top, about 10 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack to cool completely.
Place frozen hash browns in a slow cooker. Pour melted butter over hash browns. Pour in cream of chicken soup and sour cream, stirring between each addition. Add Cheddar cheese. Cook on Low for 4 to 5 hours. Stir mixture after 2 hours of cooking.